CHAPTER  a  6

AUDIT
DOCUMENTATION

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand-

 Audit Documentation.
 Nature and purpose of audit documentation.
 Form, content and extent of audit documentation.
 Audit documentation summary.
 Audit file.
 Assembly of the final audit file.
 Ownership of audit documentation.
 Practicality of above concepts by studying through examples

      and case studies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.2             AUDITING AND ETHICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

        OBJECTIVE  A sufficient and appropriate record
                   of the basis for the auditor's report

                   Evidence that the audit was planned
                    and performed in accordance with

                        SAs and applicable legal and
                           regulatory requirements

             Property of the                                        Sufficient
                   Auditor                                      Audit Evidence

        Audit Documentation

                                                                Appropriate

   Audit File                                       Completion
                                                   Memorandum

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                                6.3  a

Sameer received a news alert on his mobile pointing to unconfirmed media reports of
providing a Digi locker type facility to auditors for keeping audit documentation in
times to come. He immediately grasped the idea as Aadhar card, senior secondary
school mark sheet and driving license were being stored by him in such an electronic
locker. "Such a facility, if it happened to materialize in future in whatever form, would
provide many benefits which come with such an electronic storage", he pondered.

Audit evidence which an auditor obtains by performing various audit procedures along
with details of those procedures have to be put into writing. Further, inferences drawn
upon by the auditor from evidence obtained and conclusions reached are also
documented. Sameer was spontaneously nodding that auditing was, indeed, a logical
process.

Without proper documentation, an audit has no legs to stand upon. It is audit
documentation which serves as a record of audit work performed. He was also mulling
over that, in fact, audit documentation throws up a sort of protective shield around
auditors. If an auditor plans and performs his work professionally, his working papers
will come to his rescue, in case such a situation arises. Conclusions reached by him can
be traced to his working papers.

"Oh! That is importance of documentation", he exclaimed. Now, he understood why
Shekhar's seniors used to prompt him to make correspondence with company's
officers on mail. Because, it is the documentation that makes the difference. They were
right because consequences of not making proper documentation were known to
them and poor guys like us were still on learning curve.

     1. AUDIT DOCUMENTATION

SA 230 on "Audit Documentation", deals with the auditor's responsibility to prepare
audit documentation for an audit of financial statements. It is to be adapted as
necessary in the circumstances when applied to audits of other historical financial
information. The specific documentation requirements of other SAs do not limit the
application of this SA. Laws or regulations may establish additional documentation
requirements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.4        AUDITING AND ETHICS

1.1 Definition of Audit Documentation:

Audit Documentation refers to the record of audit procedures performed, relevant
audit evidence obtained, and conclusions the auditor reached. (terms such as
"working papers" or "work papers" are also sometimes used.)

1.2 Objective of the Auditor:

The objective of the auditor is to prepare documentation that provides:
(a) A sufficient and appropriate record of the basis for the auditor's report; and
(b) Evidence that the audit was planned and performed in accordance with SAs

       and applicable legal and regulatory requirements.

Objective of  · To prepare documentation that
the Auditor   provides:
              a) A sufficient and appropriate
              record of the basis for the
              auditor's report; and
              b) Evidence that the audit was
              planned and performed in
              accordance with SAs.

1.3 Nature of Audit Documentation

Audit documentation provides:
(a) evidence of the auditor's basis for a conclusion about the achievement of the

       overall objectives of the auditor; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                                6.5  a

(b) evidence that the audit was planned and performed in accordance with SAs
       and applicable legal and regulatory requirements.

1.4 Purpose of Audit Documentation

The following are the purpose of Audit documentation:
1. Assisting the engagement team to plan and perform the audit.
2. Assisting members of the engagement team to direct and supervise the audit

       work, and to discharge their review responsibilities.
3. Enabling the engagement team to be accountable for its work.
4. Retaining a record of matters of continuing significance to future audits.
5. Enabling the conduct of quality control reviews and inspections in accordance

       with SQC 1.
6. Enabling the conduct of external inspections in accordance with applicable

       legal, regulatory or other requirements.
ILLUSTRATION 1
A new team member of the auditors of Extremely Vibrant Limited was of the view
that Audit Documentation does not help in planning the audit of any company.
Explain whether Audit Documentation has any relation with regard to planning the
audit of a company.
SOLUTION
Audit Documentation helps in planning the audit of a company in a proper manner
and also helps in conducting the audit of that company in a more effective way.

1.5 Form, Content and Extent of Audit Documentation

 The auditor shall prepare audit documentation that is sufficient to enable an
       experienced auditor, having no previous connection with the audit, to
       understand:
       (a) The nature, timing and extent of the audit procedures performed.
       (b) The results of the audit procedures performed and the audit evidence
               obtained and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.6  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (c) Significant matters arising during the audit and the conclusions reached
               thereon and significant professional judgements made in reaching
               those conclusions.

 Further in documenting the nature, timing and extent of audit procedures
       performed, the auditor shall record:
       (a) The identifying characteristics of the specific items or matters tested.
       (b) Who performed the audit work and the date such work was completed;
               and
       (c) Who reviewed the audit work performed and the date and extent of
               such review.

 The auditor shall document discussions of significant matters with
       management, those charged with governance, and others, including the
       nature of the significant matters discussed and when and with whom the
       discussions took place.

 If the auditor identified information that is inconsistent with the auditor's final
       conclusion regarding a significant matter, the auditor shall document how
       the auditor addressed the inconsistency

The form, content and extent of audit documentation depend on
factors such as:

1. The size and complexity of the entity.

2. The nature of the audit procedures to be performed.

3. The identified risks of material misstatement.

4. The significance of the audit evidence obtained.

5. The nature and extent of exceptions identified.

6. The need to document a conclusion or the basis for a conclusion not readily
       determinable from the documentation of the work performed or audit
       evidence obtained.

7. The audit methodology and tools used.

1.6 Examples of Audit Documentation

Audit documentation may be recorded on paper or on electronic or other media.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                                             6.7  a

Example

Audit Documentation include:
Audit programmes.
Analyses.
Issues memoranda.
Summaries of significant matters.
Letters of confirmation and representation.
Checklists.
Correspondence (including e-mail) concerning significant matters.

The auditor may include copies of the entity's records (for example, significant and
specific contracts and agreements) as part of audit documentation. Audit
documentation is not a substitute for the entity's accounting records.
The auditor need not include in audit documentation superseded drafts of working
papers and financial statements, notes that reflect incomplete or preliminary
thinking, previous copies of documents corrected for typographical or other errors,
and duplicates of documents.

 Correspondence              Audit                 Analyses
(including e-mail)      programmes
                                                             Issues
    concerning              AUDIT                        memoranda
     significant    DOCUMENTATION

       matters            INCLUDE

 Checklists

   Letters of                                      Summaries
 confirmation                                            of

       and                                         significant
representation                                       matters

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

1.7 Timely Preparation of Audit Documentation

The auditor shall prepare audit documentation on a timely basis. Preparing
sufficient and appropriate audit documentation on a timely basis helps to enhance
the quality of the audit and facilitates the effective review and evaluation of the
audit evidence obtained and conclusions reached before the auditor's report is
finalised. Documentation prepared after the audit work has been performed is likely
to be less accurate than documentation prepared at the time such work is
performed.

1.8 Audit File

Audit file may be defined as one or more folders or other storage media, in physical
or electronic form, containing the records that comprise the audit documentation
for a specific engagement.

 one or more folders or other storage media

         in physical or electronic form, containing the record
         that comprise

                the audit documentation for a specific engagement

ILLUSTRATION 2

While auditing the books of accounts of Very Careful Limited for the financial year
2020-21, a team member of the auditors of Very Careful Limited was of the view that
with regard to audit of the company, no relation exists between Audit File and Audit
Documentation. Explain the relationship between Audit File and Audit
Documentation.

SOLUTION

Audit file may be defined as one or more folders or other storage media, in physical
or electronic form, containing the records that comprise the audit documentation
for a specific engagement. The auditor shall assemble the audit documentation in
an audit file and complete the administrative process of assembling the final audit
file on a timely basis after the date of the auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                                6.9  a

1.9 Assembly of the Final Audit File

The auditor shall assemble the audit documentation in an audit file and complete
the administrative process of assembling the final audit file on a timely basis after
the date of the auditor's report.

 SQC 1 "Quality Control for Firms that perform Audits and Review of Historical
       Financial Information, and other Assurance and related services", requires
       firms to establish policies and procedures for the timely completion of the
       assembly of audit files.

 An appropriate time limit within which to complete the assembly of the final
       audit file is ordinarily not more than 60 days after the date of the auditor's
       report. The completion of the assembly of the final audit file after the date of
       the auditor's report is an administrative process that does not involve the
       performance of new audit procedures or the drawing of new conclusions.

 Changes may, however, be made to the audit documentation during the final
       assembly process, if they are administrative in nature.

       Examples of such changes include:

       · Deleting or discarding superseded documentation.

       · Sorting, collating and cross-referencing working papers.

       · Signing off on completion checklists relating to the file assembly
               process.

       · Documenting audit evidence that the auditor has obtained, discussed
               and agreed with the relevant members of the engagement team before
               the date of the auditor's report.

 After the assembly of the final audit file has been completed, the auditor shall
       not delete or discard audit documentation of any nature before the end of its
       retention period.

 SQC 1 requires firms to establish policies and procedures for the retention of
       engagement documentation. The retention period for audit engagements
       ordinarily is no shorter than seven years from the date of the auditor's report,
       or, if later, the date of the group auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.10  AUDITING AND ETHICS

1.10 Documentation of Significant Matters and Related
      Significant Professional Judgements

Judging the significance of a matter requires an objective analysis of the facts and
circumstances.

Examples of significant matters include:

Matters that give rise to significant risks.

 Results of audit procedures indicating (a) that the financial statements could
       be materially misstated, or (b) a need to revise the auditor's previous
       assessment of the risks of material misstatement and the auditor's responses
       to those risks.

 Circumstances that cause the auditor significant difficulty in applying
       necessary audit procedures.

 Findings that could result in a modification to the audit opinion or the
       inclusion of an Emphasis of Matter Paragraph in the auditor's report.

An important factor in determining the form, content and extent of audit
documentation of significant matters is the extent of professional judgement
exercised in performing the work and evaluating the results.

Documentation of the professional judgements made, where significant, serves to
explain the auditor's conclusions and to reinforce the quality of the judgement.

Such matters are of particular interest to those responsible for reviewing audit
documentation, including those carrying out subsequent audits, when reviewing
matters of continuing significance (for example, when performing a retrospective
review of accounting estimates).

Some examples of circumstances in which it is appropriate to prepare audit
documentation relating to the use of professional judgement include, where
the matters and judgements are significant:

The rationale for the auditor's conclusion when a requirement provides that the
auditor `shall consider' certain information or factors, and that consideration is
significant in the context of the particular engagement.

The basis for the auditor's conclusion on the reasonableness of areas of subjective
judgements (for example, the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                                6.11  a

The basis for the auditor's conclusions about the authenticity of a document when
further investigation (such as making appropriate use of an expert or of
confirmation procedures) is undertaken in response to conditions identified during
the audit that caused the auditor to believe that the document may not be
authentic.

1.11 Completion Memorandum or Audit Documentation
      Summary

The auditor may consider it helpful to prepare and retain as part of the audit
documentation a summary (sometimes known as a completion memorandum) that
describes-

 the significant matters identified during the audit and

 how they were addressed.

Such a summary may facilitate effective and efficient review and inspection of the
audit documentation, particularly for large and complex audits. Further, the
preparation of such a summary may assist auditor's consideration of the significant
matters. It may also help the auditor to consider whether there is any individual
relevant SA objective that the auditor cannot achieve that would prevent the
auditor from achieving the overall objectives of the auditor.

1.12 Ownership of Audit Documentation

 Standard on Quality Control (SQC) 1 provides that, unless otherwise specified
       by law or regulation, audit documentation is the property of the auditor.

 He may at his discretion, make portions of, or extracts from, audit
       documentation available to clients, provided such disclosure does not
       undermine the validity of the work performed, or, in the case of assurance
       engagements, the independence of the auditor or of his personnel.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.12  AUDITING AND ETHICS

   Standard on Quality Control       He may make portions of, or
   (SQC) 1 provides that audit       extracts from, audit documentation
   documentation is the property of  available to clients subject to some
   the auditor.                      conditions.

ILLUSTRATION 3
A director of Very Different Limited was of the view that Audit Documentation of a
company is the property of that company. Comment on the contention of the director
regarding the audit documentation of the company.
SOLUTION
Audit Documentation of a company is not the property of the company rather Audit
Documentation is the property of Auditor of that company.

Test Your Understanding 1

During the course of audit of a company, an issue arose relating to treatment of
interest costs of company on its restructured loans taken from a bank. This
important matter was discussed with CFO of the company and was properly
resolved. Is it necessary for the auditor to include in its working papers?

Test Your Understanding 2

CA Sonali Morarka has completed audit of a listed company. The audit report dated
15th July, 2022 has been issued. However, audit working papers including record
of discussions with management, details of audit procedures performed to obtain
audit evidence and conclusions reached by her have not been properly assembled.
More than six months have elapsed after issue of audit report. Subsequently, she
has received a letter from regulator in connection with audit of the company
requesting her to share copy of audit file.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                                6.13  a

The letter has woken up her from deep slumber. She hurriedly assembled audit file
and inserted some more papers which were necessary. However, she put current
date on these inserted papers and the copy of audit file was sent to regulator.
Discuss, the issues involved, in context of "audit documentation".

CASE STUDY

CA Rajan Pillai is heading the engagement team conducting audit of a company.
While audit is in progress, consider following issues regarding audit
documentation:-

(A) Audit programme was prepared assigning responsibilities for different types
       of works to be performed to team members. The engagement team consists
       of 4 members Mohit (CA final student), Rohit (CA final student), Shobhit (Paid
       CA) and CA Rajan Pillai (partner of audit firm).

(B) The team has determined materiality for financial statements as a whole.

(C) The team has assessed risks of material misstatements to be low.

(D) CA Shobhit is responsible for attending inventory count process and putting
       down its documentation part.

(E) During the course of audit, many related party transactions have come to
       notice.

On the basis of above, answer the following questions:

(1) Work relating to verification of revenue was assigned to Mohit in audit
       programme. However, it is being performed by Rohit actually. Verification of
       trade receivables was planned to be carried out by Rohit in audit programme.
       However, it being performed by CA Rajan Pillai due to last minute practical
       issues. Which of the following statements is most appropriate in this regard
       relating to audit documentation?

       (a) Audit programme contains names of persons and work to be performed.
               It is immaterial whether work assigned to one person is performed by
               another person.

       (b) Audit programme was already prepared. Only persons assigned specific
               responsibilities can perform those duties.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.14  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (c) It is necessary that audit programme be suitably updated or notes are
               given in working papers to this effect so that planned duties are in
               accordance with actual work performance.

       (d) Changes in audit programme or notes clarifying the matter are required
               only when a person not forming part of engagement team is deputed to
               perform a duty. Otherwise, this issue of inter-shuffling of team members
               is frivolous.

(2) As regards materiality, which of the following statements is most appropriate
       in context of audit documentation?

       (a) Materiality has already been determined. There is no need to put it into
               working papers.

       (b) Materiality depends upon professional judgment of auditor. Whatever
               amount has been determined can be documented in working papers.

       (c) Materiality arrived on basis of professional judgment along with factors
               considered in the determination has to be documented.

       (d) Materiality has been arrived upon professional judgment. It also depends
               upon professional judgment of auditor whether he wants to document it
               or not.

(3) As regards team's assessment that risk of material misstatements is low, which
       of the following statements is odd one relating to documentation of risk?

       (a) Discussion amongst engagement team members and detail of significant
               decisions reached has to be documented.

       (b) Details of risk assessment procedures have to be documented.

       (c) Details about how understanding of each component of internal control
               was obtained has to be documented.

       (d) Precise calculation of risk of material misstatements has to be
               documented.

(4) CA Shobhit is responsible for attending physical inventory count of the
       company. Which of the following is not true in this regard relating to audit
       documentation?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                          6.15  a

       (a) Dates on which physical inventory count process was attended by him
               should be documented. It may also include photographs of that date
               showing his attendance of inventory counting process at a particular
               location.

       (b) Detail of test counting undertaken should form part of audit
               documentation.

       (c) Detail of obsolete goods found should form part of audit documentation.

       (d) Reports showing that stocks conform to quality control standards in
               accordance with law are essential part of audit documentation.

(5) As regards related party transactions, which of the following should not be part
       of audit documentation?

       (a) Management representation letter in this regard

       (b) Related party transaction policy of the company

       (c) Documentation to show that such transactions are at arm's length basis

       (d) Documentation to show that such transactions are at close length basis.

Answers to Questions involving case study

1. c  2. c  3. d                                   4. d  5. d

SUMMARY

 SA 230 on "Audit Documentation", deals with the auditor's responsibility to
       prepare audit documentation for an audit of financial statements.

 Audit documentation refers to the record of audit procedures performed,
       relevant audit evidence obtained, and conclusions the auditor reached. Terms
       such as "working papers" or "work papers" are also sometimes used.

 The objective of auditor is to prepare audit documentation that provides a
       sufficient and appropriate record of the basis for auditor's report and
       evidence that audit was planned and performed in accordance with Standards
       on Auditing and applicable legal and regulatory requirements.

 The form, content and extent of audit documentation depend on number of
       factors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.16  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 Audit documentation may be recorded on paper or on electronic or other
       media.

 The auditor shall prepare audit documentation on a timely basis. Preparing
       sufficient and appropriate audit documentation on a timely basis helps to
       enhance the quality of the audit and facilitates the effective review and
       evaluation of the audit evidence obtained and conclusions reached before
       the auditor's report is finalized.

 Audit file may be defined as one or more folders or other storage media, in
       physical or electronic form, containing the records that comprise the audit
       documentation for a specific engagement.

 The auditor shall assemble the audit documentation in an audit file and
       complete the administrative process of assembling the final audit file on a
       timely basis after the date of the auditor's report.

 An appropriate time limit within which to complete the assembly of the final
       audit file is ordinarily not more than 60 days after the date of the auditor's
       report. The completion of the assembly of the final audit file after the date of
       the auditor's report is an administrative process that does not involve the
       performance of new audit procedures or the drawing of new conclusions.

 After the assembly of the final audit file has been completed, the auditor shall
       not delete or discard audit documentation of any nature before the end of its
       retention period.

 The retention period of documentation for audit engagements ordinarily is
       no shorter than seven years from the date of the auditor's report, or, if later,
       the date of the group auditor's report.

 Unless otherwise specified by law or regulation, audit documentation is the
       property of the auditor. He may at his discretion, make portions of, or extracts
       from, audit documentation available to clients, provided such disclosure does
       not undermine the validity of the work performed, or, in the case of assurance
       engagements, the independence of the auditor or of his personnel.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                                6.17  a

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQs based Questions

(1) Which of the following statement is appropriately suited to preparation of audit
       documentation?
       (a) Audit documentation has to be prepared simultaneously as audit
               progresses.
       (b) Audit documentation has to be prepared 60 days after date of audit
               report.
       (c) Audit documentation has to be prepared when information is required by
               regulator.
       (d) Audit documentation has to be prepared 60 days after completion of
               audit work.

(2) Audit documentation is owned by: -
       (a) Client
       (b) Auditor
       (c) Team member responsible for documentation
       (d) Regulator

(3) Which of the following is least likely to be included in audit documentation of
       a company engaged in manufacturing and export of goods?
       (a) Previous years audited financial statements
       (b) Projected cash flow statement for next twelve months provided by
               management in support of going concern assumption
       (c) Statements showing dispatch of overseas consignments in accordance
               with delivery schedules of overseas buyers
       (d) Statement showing verification of ageing of trade receivables as on date
               of balance sheet

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.18  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(4) Which of the following is false in relation to audit documentation when an
       external auditor relies upon work of internal auditor?

       (a) Evaluation of objectivity and competence of internal auditor has to be
               documented.

       (b) Nature of work used and reason for relying upon work used forms part of
               documentation.

       (c) Documentation on whether quality control is exercised in internal audit
               work forms part of audit documentation.

       (d) Documentation on what specific recommendations were given by internal
               auditor for risk assessment to external auditor forms part of audit
               documentation.

Correct/Incorrect

State with reasons (in short) whether the following statements are correct
or incorrect:

(i) As per SA 230 on "Audit Documentation", the working papers are not the property
       of the auditor.

(ii) Mr. A is a statutory auditor of ABC Ltd. The branch of ABC Ltd. is audited by
       Mr. B, another Chartered Accountant. Mr. A requests for the photocopies of the
       audit documentation of Mr. B pertaining to the branch audit.

Theoretical Questions

1. The form, content and extent of audit documentation depends upon number of
       factors. List out any four such factors.

2. Discuss any two purposes of audit documentation.

3. Define audit documentation. Also give some examples.

4. "Audit documentation summary may facilitate effective and efficient reviews
       and inspections of the audit documentation, particularly for large and complex
       audits". Explain.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            AUDIT DOCUMENTATION                          6.19  a

ANSWERS/ SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs based Questions

1. a  2. b  3. c                                   4. d

Answers to Correct/Incorrect

(i) Incorrect: As per SA 230 on "Audit Documentation" the working papers are
       the property of the auditor and the auditor has right to retain them. He may
       at his discretion can make available working papers to his client. The auditor
       should retain them long enough to meet the needs of his practice and legal
       or professional requirement.

(ii) Incorrect: SA 230 issued by ICAI on Audit Documentation, and "Standard on
       Quality Control (SQC) 1, provides that, unless otherwise specified by law or
       regulation, audit documentation is the property of the auditor. He may at his
       discretion, make portions of, or extracts from, audit documentation available
       to clients, provided such disclosure does not undermine the validity of the
       work performed, or, in the case of assurance engagements, the independence
       of the auditor or of his personnel.

Answers to Theoretical Questions

1. Refer to heading "Form, content and extent of audit documentation"
2. Refer to heading "Purpose of audit documentation"
3. Audit Documentation refers to the record of audit procedures performed,

       relevant audit evidence obtained, and conclusions the auditor reached. (terms
       such as "working papers" or "work papers" are also sometimes used.)
       Refer Heading ­ Examples of Audit Documentation
4. Refer Heading ­ Completion Memorandum or Audit Documentation
       Summary

Answers to Questions involving Test your Understanding

(1) The auditor shall document discussions of significant matters with
       management, those charged with governance, and others, including the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.20  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       nature of the significant matters discussed and when and with whom the
       discussions took place.

       In the instant case, an important matter regarding treatment of interest costs
       of company on its restructured loans taken from a bank directly impacting
       profits of the company was discussed. Although issue was resolved, it is
       necessary to document the same by including detail of the person with whom
       discussions took place along with date.

(2) An appropriate time limit within which to complete the assembly of the final
       audit file is ordinarily not more than 60 days after the date of the auditor's
       report.

       Further, preparing sufficient and appropriate audit documentation on a
       timely basis helps to enhance the quality of the audit and facilitates the
       effective review and evaluation of the audit evidence obtained and
       conclusions reached before the auditor's report is finalized. Documentation
       prepared after the audit work has been performed is likely to be less accurate
       than documentation prepared at the time such work is performed.

       In the given case, even after passage of more than six months, she has not
       assembled audit file. Besides, she has put in some papers with current date
       which is not permissible at all. It shows that part of audit documentation has
       been prepared afterwards putting a question mark on quality of audit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
