CHAPTER  2

AUDIT STRATEGY,
AUDIT PLANNING
AND AUDIT
PROGRAMME

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to -
 Understand the Audit Planning and its benefits.
 Learn about Planning Process and its Elements.
 Learn about establishing overall strategy and developing

      audit plan in detail.
 Learn about audit programme.
 Gain the knowledge of control of quality of audit work w.r.t

      delegation and supervision of audit work.
 Practicality of above concepts by studying through examples

      and case studies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.2  AUDITING AND ETHICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

Planning an audit involves:

     Establishing the overall audit strategy

     Developing an audit plan

       The auditor should plan his work to enable him to
     conduct an effective audit in an efficient and timely

                                   manner.

     Plans should be based on knowledge of
                  the client's business.

      Plans should be further developed and
     revised as necessary during the course of

                          the audit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                      2.3

                                                   PROGRAMME

By now, Sameer had grasped basic nature of auditing. It was crystal clear to him
that objective of an audit of financial statements is to express an opinion on the
same. He could easily visualize that a complex process like audit needs to be
performed methodically. "Carrying out an audit ought to be a logical and
systematic process leading from one step to another. Performing a complex
process effectively, would certainly, be involving planning. Planning helps one to
achieve desired objectives. Audits should be no different"- He was talking to
himself.

Besides, he was pretty sure that there must be timelines in which audits were to
be completed for different entities. He remembered his father had held few shares
of some blue-chip companies. He was able to recall that notices of annual general
meetings of these companies used to be delivered at their ancestral home in
Rajkot and those also related to consideration and adoption of audited accounts.
Linking that, he had reasonably concluded that audits were required to be
performed in a timely manner. The whole audit process, therefore, must be
properly planned to ensure its effectiveness.

He was curious to learn about how planning for an audit is undertaken. What are
the basic elements of planning? What are likely matters to be included therein?

He was aware about CA students undergoing articled training. Most of the
students must be going for audit work of different entities as part of their practical
training. A thought came to his mind- "How do students who have freshly joined
their articles carry out audit work? There must be some mechanism, some sort of
detailed set of instructions for carrying out audit. What is it known as?" His
inquisitive mind was constantly engaged in such kind of questions.

He was also anxious to know what would happen to audit plan if some new
information comes to light of auditor during course of audit which was hitherto
unknown to him at time of planning? Is audit plan flexible? Can it be changed as
audit progresses? Another question raging in his mind was whether all such
information was necessary to be put in writing by the auditor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.4  AUDITING AND ETHICS

    1. AUDITOR'S RESPONSIBILITY TO PLAN AN
          AUDIT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

SA 300- Planning an audit of financial statements deals with the auditor's
responsibility to plan an audit of financial statements. It states that objective of the
auditor is to plan the audit so that it will be performed in an effective manner.

1.1 Why Planning an audit is necessary? - Its Benefits

Planning an audit is necessary to carry out it effectively in a timely manner. Besides
ensuring compliance with professional standards, it helps in performing audit
engagement effectively.

Adequate planning benefits the audit of financial statements in several ways,
including the following: -

1. Helping the auditor to devote appropriate attention to important areas of the
       audit.

2. Helping the auditor identify and resolve potential problems on a timely basis.

3. Helping the auditor properly organize and manage the audit engagement so
       that it is performed in an effective and efficient manner.

4. Assisting in the selection of engagement team members with appropriate
       levels of capabilities and competence to respond to anticipated risks, and the
       proper assignment of work to them.

5. Facilitating the direction and supervision of engagement team members and
       the review of their work.

6. Assisting, where applicable, in coordination of work done by others such as
       experts

Therefore, planning an audit ensures that audit risk is reduced to an acceptable low
level. When audit work is adequately and properly planned, it reduces the risk of
inappropriate opinion by the auditor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                         2.5

                                                   PROGRAMME

                      Appropriate attention
                        to important areas

Coordination with                                   Benefits of        Identify and
other Auditors and                                   Planning       Resolve Potential

       Experts                                     Selection of          Problems
                                                       Team
     Direction and                                                Efficient and
 Supervision of Team                                Members      Effective Audit

   & Review of work

1.2 Nature of Audit Planning- A Continuous and iterative
      process

Planning is not a discrete phase of an audit, but rather a continual and iterative
process that often begins shortly after (or in connection with) the completion of
the previous audit and continues until the completion of the current audit
engagement. Planning, however, includes consideration of the timing of certain
activities and audit procedures that need to be completed prior to the performance
of further audit procedures. For example, planning includes the need to consider,
prior to the auditor's identification and assessment of the risks of material
misstatement, such matters as: -

1. The analytical procedures to be applied as risk assessment procedures.

2. Obtaining a general understanding of the legal and regulatory framework
       applicable to the entity and how the entity is complying with that framework.

3. The determination of materiality.

4. The involvement of experts.

5. The performance of other risk assessment procedures.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.6  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Risk assessment procedures are audit procedures performed to obtain an
understanding of the entity and its environment, including the entity's internal
control, to identify and assess the risks of material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error at the financial statement and assertion levels.

Therefore, planning includes consideration of matters such as obtaining knowledge
about legal framework in which entity is operating. Consider for example- Telecom
companies and Banks. Such entities operate in different legal and regulatory
frameworks. TRAI (Telecom Regulatory Authority of India) and RBI (Reserve Bank of
India) are regulators for telecom and banking industry respectively.

Planning also includes need to consider determination of material or significant
matters. It also involves considering whether experts need to be involved taking
into account complexity of business. Further, it also involves considering need to
perform risk assessment procedures for identifying and assessing risks of material
misstatement.

Planning is not a separate or distinct phase of an audit. It is to be viewed as a
continual and repetitive process. It is a continuous process that begins with
completion of previous audit and continues till the completion of current audit
engagement.

Involvement of key engagement team members in planning audit

The engagement partner and other key members of the engagement team shall be
involved in planning the audit including planning and participating in the
discussion among engagement team members. The involvement of the
engagement partner and other key members of the engagement team in planning
the audit draws on their experience and insight, thereby enhancing the
effectiveness and efficiency of the planning process.

Discussion of elements of planning with entity's management

The auditor may decide to discuss elements of planning with the entity's
management to facilitate the conduct and management of the audit engagement.
When discussing matters included in the overall audit strategy or audit plan, care
is required in order not to compromise the effectiveness of the audit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                      2.7

                                                   PROGRAMME

    2. Planning Process- Elements of Planning

The elements of planning can be categorized as under: -

(I) Preliminary engagement activities

(II) Planning activities

(I) Preliminary engagement activities

The auditor considers whether relationship with client should be continued and
whether ethical requirements including independence continue to be complied
with. It includes: -

(A) Performing procedures regarding the continuance of the client relationship

(B) Evaluating compliance with ethical requirements, including independence

(C) Establishing an understanding of terms of engagement
Preliminary engagement activities include the following: -

(A) Performing procedures regarding the Continuance of Client
       Relationships and Audit Engagements

       Acceptance and Continuance of Client Relationships and Audit
       Engagements

       It should be ensured that appropriate procedures regarding the acceptance
       and continuance of client relationships and audit engagements have been
       followed and that conclusions reached in this regard are appropriate.

       The firm should obtain information considered necessary in the
       circumstances before accepting an engagement with a new client, when
       deciding whether to continue an existing engagement, and when considering
       acceptance of a new engagement with an existing client.

       Matters such as integrity of principal owners and key management,
       competence of engagement team to perform the audit engagement and
       implications of matters that have arisen during current and previous audit
       engagement may need to be considered.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       Besides, in case of initial engagements, communication with predecessor
       auditor should be made, where there has been a change of auditors.

(B) Evaluating compliance with ethical requirements including
       independence

       The auditor shall continuously evaluate compliance with ethical requirements
       including independence. "Independence" means that the judgement of a
       person is not subordinate to the wishes or direction of another person who
       might have engaged him.

       Throughout the audit engagement, the engagement partner shall remain
       alert, through observation and making inquiries as necessary, for evidence of
       non-compliance with relevant ethical requirements by members of the
       engagement team. If matters come to the engagement partner's attention
       that indicate that members of the engagement team have not complied with
       relevant ethical requirements, the engagement partner, in consultation with
       others in the firm, shall determine the appropriate action.

       The engagement partner shall form a conclusion on compliance with
       independence requirements that apply to the audit engagement. In doing so,
       the engagement partner shall: -

       (i) Obtain relevant information from the firm to identify and evaluate
               circumstances and relationships that create threats to independence

       (ii) Evaluate information on identified breaches, if any, of the firm's
               independence policies and procedures to determine whether they
               create a threat to independence for the audit engagement and

       (iii) Take appropriate action to eliminate such threats or reduce them to an
               acceptable level by applying safeguards, or, if considered appropriate,
               to withdraw from the audit engagement, where withdrawal is permitted
               by law or regulation. The engagement partner shall promptly report to
               the firm any inability to resolve the matter for appropriate action.

       Besides, consideration for client continuance and compliance with ethical
       requirements, preliminary engagements activities also include establishing an
       understanding of terms of engagement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                      2.9

                                                   PROGRAMME

(C) Establishing an understanding of terms of engagement

       It is in the interests of both the entity and the auditor that the auditor sends
       an audit engagement letter before the commencement of the audit to help
       avoid misunderstandings with respect to the audit. It ensures that there is no
       confusion with the client regarding terms of the engagement.

Performing preliminary engagement activities assists the auditor in
identifying and evaluating events or circumstances that may affect auditor's
ability to plan and perform audit engagement.

An overview of Preliminary engagement activities

Checkbox  What is included in Preliminary engagement activities?

          Performing procedures regarding the continuance of client

          relationship

          Evaluating Compliance with ethical requirements including

          independence

          Establishing an understanding of terms of engagement with the

          client to ensure there are no misunderstandings

(II) Planning activities

Planning activities involve: -
[A] Establishing the overall audit strategy
[B] Developing an audit plan
(A) Establishing the overall audit strategy- Assistance for the auditor

       Overall audit strategy sets the scope, timing and direction of the audit, and
       guides the development of the more detailed audit plan.

       The auditor shall establish an overall audit strategy that sets the scope, timing
       and direction of the audit, and that guides the development of the audit plan.
       The process of establishing the overall audit strategy assists the auditor to
       determine, subject to the completion of the auditor's risk assessment
       procedures, such matters as: -

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.10  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(i) The resources to deploy for specific audit areas, such as the use of
       appropriately experienced team members for high-risk areas or the
       involvement of experts on complex matters

(ii) The amount of resources to allocate to specific audit areas, such as the
       number of team members assigned to observe the inventory count at
       material locations, the extent of review of other auditors' work in the
       case of group audits, or the audit budget in hours to allocate to high
       risk areas

(iii) When these resources are to be deployed, such as whether at an interim
       audit stage or at key cut-off dates

(iv) How such resources are managed, directed and supervised, such as
       when team briefing and debriefing meetings are expected to be held,
       how engagement partner and manager reviews are expected to take
       place (for example, on-site or off-site), and whether to complete
       engagement quality control reviews

Factors to be taken into consideration by auditor for establishing audit
strategy

The auditor shall take following factors into consideration while establishing
audit strategy: -

(a) Identify the characteristics of the engagement that define its scope

       It is important for auditor to identify scope of the engagement. Only a
       well identified scope can lead to establishment of a sound audit
       strategy. There are many characteristics of engagement defining its
       scope. Some of characteristics are as under: -

        Applicable financial reporting framework applicable to the entity

        Nature of business segments to be audited including the need for
               specialized knowledge

        Industry specific reporting requirements required by industry
               regulators

        Expected use of audit evidence obtained in previous audits

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                      2.11

                                                   PROGRAMME

(b) Ascertain the reporting objectives of the engagement to plan the
       timing of the audit and the nature of the communications required.

       The ascertaining of reporting objectives of engagement helps the
       auditor to plan timing of different audit procedures and also nature of
       communications. Some of the instances are given under: -

        The entity's timetable for reporting

        Organization of meetings to discuss of nature, timing and extent
               of audit work with management

        Discussion with management regarding the expected type and
               timing of reports to be issued including the auditor's report

        Discussion with management regarding the expected
               communications on the status of audit work throughout the
               engagement.

        Expected nature and timing of communications among
               engagement team members, including the nature and timing of
               team meetings and timing of the review of work performed.

(c) Consider the factors that, in the auditor's professional judgment,
       are significant in directing the engagement team's efforts

       The auditor needs to direct efforts of engagement team towards
       matters that in his professional judgment are significant. Preliminary
       identification of material classes of transactions, account balances and
       disclosures help auditor in establishing overall audit strategy. More
       energies need to be devoted to significant matters to obtain desired
       outcomes. Few examples are listed as under: -

        Volume of transactions which may determine whether it is more
               efficient for the auditor to rely on internal control

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.12  AUDITING AND ETHICS

        Significant industry developments such as changes in industry
               regulations and new reporting requirements.

        Significant changes in the financial reporting framework, such as
               changes in accounting standards.

        Other significant relevant developments, such as changes in the
               legal environment affecting the entity.

(d) Consider the results of preliminary engagement activities and,
       where applicable, whether knowledge gained on other
       engagements performed by the engagement partner for the entity
       is relevant

       Considering results of preliminary engagement activities and
       knowledge gained from similar engagements goes a long way in
       establishing sound audit strategy. Examples are listed as under: -

        Results of previous audits that involved evaluating the operating
               effectiveness of internal control, including the nature of identified
               deficiencies and action taken to address them.

        The manner in which the auditor emphasizes to engagement team
               members the need to maintain a questioning mind and to exercise
               professional skepticism in gathering and evaluating audit
               evidence.

(e) Ascertain the nature, timing and extent of resources necessary to
       perform the engagement.

       Selection of engagement team and assignment of audit work to team
       members is a significant factor in establishing overall audit strategy.
       Experienced team members may be assigned in areas where there is
       higher risk of material misstatement. Similarly, engagement budgeting
       and devotion of more time to areas of higher risk of material
       misstatement are to be kept in mind.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                                2.13
                                                PROGRAMME

In establishing the overall audit strategy, the auditor shall:

Identify the    Ascertain the                      Consideration of     Consider the  Ascertain the
scope of the      reporting                        significant factors    results of  nature, timing
engagement                                                              preliminary   and extent of
              objectives of the                     in directing the
                engagement                            engagement        engagement       resources
                                                     team's efforts       activities   required for

                                                                                             the
                                                                                      engagement.

ILLUSTRATION 1

The auditor T of Hand Fab Ltd is worried as to management of key resources to be
employed to conduct audit.

Required

How the audit strategy would be helpful to the auditor?

SOLUTION

Refer - Establishing the overall audit strategy- Assistance for the auditor for solution.

(B) Development of Audit plan

       Once the overall audit strategy has been established, an audit plan can be
       developed to address the various matters identified in the overall audit
       strategy, taking into account the need to achieve the audit objectives through
       the efficient use of the auditor's resources.

       Understanding client's business is one of the important principles in
       developing an audit plan. In fact, without adequate knowledge of client's
       business, a proper audit is not possible. Gaining knowledge of client's business
       is, therefore, one of the foremost requirements to develop audit plan.

       SA-300 states that auditor shall develop an audit plan that shall include
       description of-

       (i) The nature, timing and extent of planned risk assessment procedures

       (ii) The nature, timing and extent of planned further audit procedures at
               assertion level

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.14                   AUDITING AND ETHICS

(iii) Other planned audit procedures that are required to be carried out so
       that the engagement complies with SAs.

The auditor plans what type of audit procedures are to be performed, their
timing and how much work should be done taking into account sample size etc.

The audit plan is more detailed than the overall audit strategy that includes
the nature, timing and extent of audit procedures to be performed by
engagement team members. Planning for these audit procedures takes place
over the course of the audit as the audit plan for the engagement develops.

For example, planning of the auditor's risk assessment procedures occurs
early in the audit process. However, planning the nature, timing and extent
of specific further audit procedures depends on the outcome of those risk
assessment procedures. In addition, the auditor may begin the execution of
further audit procedures for some classes of transactions, account balances
and disclosures before planning all remaining further audit procedures.

      Elements of Planning

       Preliminary                                 Planning activities
engagement activities

      Establishing overall                         Developing audit
         audit strategy                                    plan

Test Your Understanding 1

MG & Co, a firm of auditors, having a standing of 30 years is appointed as a
statutory auditor of company engaged in manufacturing of defence equipment.
Due to opening of defence sector by government to private players in recent times,
many new companies have entered the fray to manufacture sophisticated defence
equipment. Considering technical and complex nature of operations, the auditors
recognize that involvement of experts in the audit is required. Does consideration
for involvement of experts by auditors fall in the domain of planning audit?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.15
                                                PROGRAMME

Test Your Understanding 2

CA Kartik is planning for audit of a company engaged in manufacturing of
cosmetics. Considering nature of operations of the company, he had planned to
include testing of controls of the company over purchases, sales and inventories.
One fine day, he reaches the corporate office and asks for manuals and required
documentation to ensure surprise element in testing. He had never shared with
management his intention to carry out above procedures. Is approach of CA Kartik
proper?

    3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AUDIT STRATEGY
          AND AUDIT PLAN

Audit strategy sets the broad overall approach to the audit whereas audit plan
addresses the various matters identified in the overall audit strategy. Audit strategy
determines scope, timing and direction of audit. Audit plan describes how strategy
is going to be implemented. The audit plan is more detailed than the overall audit
strategy that includes the nature, timing and extent of audit procedures to be
performed by engagement team members. Planning for these audit procedures
takes place over the course of the audit as the audit plan for the engagement
develops.

Once the overall audit strategy has been established, an audit plan can be
developed to address the various matters identified in the overall audit strategy,
taking into account the need to achieve the audit objectives through the efficient
use of the auditor's resources.

The establishment of the overall audit strategy and the detailed audit plan are not
necessarily discrete or sequential processes, but are closely inter-related since
changes in one may result in consequential changes to the other.

    4. OVERALL AUDIT STRATEGY AND THE AUDIT
          PLAN- THE AUDITOR'S RESPONSIBILITY

The overall audit strategy and the audit plan remain the auditor's responsibility. It is
the auditor who is responsible for establishing overall audit strategy and developing

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.16  AUDITING AND ETHICS

audit plan. However, as discussed earlier, auditor may discuss elements of planning
with entity's management without compromising effectiveness of audit.

ILLUSTRATION 2

W, the auditor of SKM Ltd. asks its finance and audit head to prepare audit strategy
for conducting audit of SKM Ltd. W also insists him to draw detailed audit procedures.
On the request of auditor W completes audit strategy as well as audit procedures as
prepared by finance head of the company. Subsequently, auditor realizes that
effectiveness of the audit is compromised and it was his responsibility to prepare the
overall audit strategy. Comment.

SOLUTION

Refer - Overall audit strategy and the audit plan- The auditor's responsibility -

Accordingly, approach of W was wrong and he should have prepared overall audit
strategy and detailed audit procedures.

    5. CHANGES TO PLANNING DECISIONS

          DURING THE COURSE OF AUDIT

The auditor shall update and change the overall audit strategy and the audit plan
as necessary during the course of the audit. As a result of unexpected events,
changes in conditions, or the audit evidence obtained from the results of audit
procedures, the auditor may need to modify the overall audit strategy and audit
plan and thereby the resulting planned nature, timing and extent of further audit
procedures, based on the revised consideration of assessed risks. This may be the
case when information comes to the auditor's attention that differs significantly
from the information available when the auditor planned the audit procedures. For
example, audit evidence obtained through on detailed checking may contradict the
audit evidence obtained through testing internal controls.

    6. PLANNING SUPERVISION AND REVIEW OF
          WORK OF ENGAGEMENT TEAM MEMBERS

The auditor shall plan the nature, timing and extent of direction and supervision of
engagement team members and the review of their work. The nature, timing and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.17
                                                PROGRAMME

extent of the direction and supervision of engagement team members and review
of their work vary depending on many factors, including: -

1. The size and complexity of the entity.

2. The area of the audit.

3. The assessed risks of material misstatement

4. The capabilities and competence of the individual team members performing
       the audit work.

    7. DOCUMENTATION

The auditor shall document: -

(a) the overall audit strategy

(b) the audit plan and

(c) any significant changes made during the audit engagement to the overall
       audit strategy or the audit plan, and the reasons for such changes.

The documentation of the overall audit strategy is a record of the key decisions
considered necessary to properly plan the audit and to communicate significant
matters to the engagement team.

The documentation of the audit plan is a record of the planned nature, timing and
extent of risk assessment procedures and further audit procedures at the assertion
level in response to the assessed risks. It also serves as a record of the proper
planning of the audit procedures that can be reviewed and approved prior to their
performance. The auditor may use standard audit programs and/or audit
completion checklists, tailored as needed to reflect the particular engagement
circumstances.

A record of the significant changes to the overall audit strategy and the audit plan,
and resulting changes to the planned nature, timing and extent of audit procedures,
explains why the significant changes were made, and the overall strategy and audit
plan finally adopted for the audit. It also reflects the appropriate response to the
significant changes occurring during the audit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.18  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Test Your Understanding 3

CA Mary, while planning audit of a company, feels that she would inquire from
inhouse legal counsel of the company status of pending litigation matters against
the company to identify and assess risks of material misstatements. Considering
above description, are you able to identify said procedures? Where these identified
procedures are included in planning in accordance with SA-300?

Test Your Understanding 4

CA Shubhendu is statutory auditor of a social media company. Due to change in
information technology regulations by government, it has become mandatory for
such companies to constitute "grievance redressal mechanism" for users of social
media platform of the company. Failure to comply with regulations can potentially
lead to civil and criminal liabilities against the company. Is above factor to be
considered by auditor while framing audit strategy?

    8. AUDIT PROGRAMME

It is desirable that in respect of each audit and more particularly for bigger audits,
an audit programme should be drawn up. Audit programme is a list of examination
and verification steps to be applied and set out in such a way that the
interrelationship of one step to another is clearly shown and designed, keeping in
view the assertions discernible in the statements of account produced for audit or
on the basis of an appraisal of the accounting records of the client.

An audit programme consists of a series of verification procedures to be applied to
the financial statements and accounts of a given entity for the purpose of obtaining
sufficient evidence to enable the auditor to express an informed opinion on
financial statements.

In other words, an audit programme is a detailed plan of applying the audit
procedures in the given circumstances with instructions for the appropriate
techniques to be adopted for accomplishing the audit objectives.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.19
                                                PROGRAMME

8.1 Evolving one audit programme- Not Practicable for
      All businesses

Businesses vary in nature, size and composition; work which is suitable to one
business may not be suitable to others; efficiency and operation of internal controls
and the exact nature of the service to be rendered by the auditor are the other
factors that vary from assignment to assignment. On account of such variations,
evolving one audit programme applicable to all business under all circumstances is
not practicable. However, it becomes a necessity to specify in detail in the audit
programme the nature of work to be done so that no time will be wasted on matters
not pertinent to the engagement and any special matter or any specific situation
can be taken care of.

8.2 The Assistant to keep an open mind

To start with, an auditor having regard to the nature, size and composition of the
business and the dependability of the internal control and the given scope of work,
should frame a programme which should aim at providing for a minimum essential
work which may be termed as a standard programme. As experience is gained by
actually carrying out the work, the programme may be altered to take care of
situations which were left out originally, but are found relevant for the particular
concern. Similarly, if any work originally provided for proves beyond doubt to be
unnecessary or irrelevant, it may be dropped. The assistant engaged in the job should
be encouraged to keep an open mind beyond the programme given to him. He
should be instructed to note and report significant matters coming to his notice, to
his seniors or to the partners or proprietor of the firm engaged for doing the audit.

8.3 Periodic review of the audit programme

There should be periodic review of the audit programme to assess whether the
same continues to be adequate for obtaining requisite knowledge and evidence
about the transactions. Unless this is done, any change in the business policy of the
client may not be adequately known, and consequently, audit work may be carried
on, on the basis of an obsolete programme and, for this negligence, the whole audit
may be held as negligently conducted and the auditor may have to face legal
consequences.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.20  AUDITING AND ETHICS

The utility of the audit programme can be retained and enhanced only by keeping
the programme as also the client's operations and internal control under periodic
review so that inadequacies or redundancies of the programme may be removed.
However, as a basic feature, audit programme not only lists the tasks to be carried
out but also contains a few relevant instructions, like the extent of checking, the
sampling plan, etc. So long as the programme is not officially changed by the
principal, every assistant deputed on the job should unfailingly carry out the
detailed work according to the instructions governing the work. Many persons
believe that this brings an element of rigidity in the audit programme. This is not
true provided the periodic review is undertaken to keep the programme as up-to-
date as possible and by encouraging the assistants on the job to observe all salient
features of the various accounting functions of the client.

8.4 Constructing an audit programme

The audit planning ideally commences at the conclusion of the previous year's
audit, and along with the related programme, it should be reconsidered for
modification as the audit progresses. Such consideration is based on the auditor's
review of the internal control, his preliminary evaluation thereof, and the results of
his compliance and substantive procedures.

While developing an audit programme, the auditor may conclude that relying on
certain internal controls is an effective and efficient way to conduct his audit.
However, the auditor may decide not to rely on internal controls when there are
other more efficient ways of obtaining sufficient appropriate audit evidence. The
auditor should also consider the timing of the procedures, the coordination of any
assistance expected from the client, the availability of assistants, and the
involvement of other auditors or experts.

Further, the auditor normally has flexibility in deciding when to perform audit
procedures. However, in some cases, the auditor may have no discretion as to
timing, for example, when observing the taking of inventories by client personnel
or verifying the securities and cash balances at the year-end.

For the purpose of programme construction, the following points should be kept
in mind:

(1) Stay within the scope and limitation of the assignment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.21
                                                PROGRAMME

(2) Prepare a written audit programme setting forth the procedures that are
       needed to implement the audit plan.

(3) Determine the evidence reasonably available and identify the best evidence
       for deriving the necessary satisfaction.

(4) Apply only those steps and procedures which are useful in accomplishing the
       verification purpose in the specific situation.

(5) Include the audit objectives for each area and sufficient details which serve
       as a set of instructions for the assistants involved in audit and help in
       controlling the proper execution of the work.

(6) Consider all possibilities of error.

(7) Co-ordinate the procedures to be applied to related items.

                Stay within the
                    scope and

                limitation of the
                   assignment.

 Co-ordinate                                                 Prepare a
       the                                                 written audit
                                                           programme.
procedures to
be applied to
related items.

Consider all                                                               Determine the
possibilities                                                                 evidence
                                                                             reasonably
  of error.
                                                                           available and
                          Include the                                    identify the best
                              audit
                                                                              evidence.
                        objectives for
                           each area.              Apply only those
                                                    steps which are

                                                        useful in
                                                    accomplishing
                                                    the verification

                                                        purpose.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.22  AUDITING AND ETHICS

8.5 Audit Programme- Designed to provide audit
      evidence

Audit evidence may be defined as the information used by the auditor in arriving
at the conclusions on which the auditor's opinion is based. Audit evidence includes
both information contained in the accounting records underlying the financial
statements and other information.

Evidence is the very basis for formulation of opinion and an audit programme is
designed to provide for that by prescribing procedures and techniques. What is
best evidence for testing the accuracy of any assertion is a matter of expert
knowledge and experience. This is the primary task before the auditor when he
draws up the audit programme. Transactions are varied in nature and impact;
procedures to be prescribed depend on prior knowledge of what evidence is
reasonably available in respect of each transaction.

In most of the assertions much of the evidence be drawn and each one should be
considered and weighed to ascertain its weight to prove or disprove the assertion. In
this process, an auditor would be in a position to identify the evidence that brings the
highest satisfaction to him about the appropriateness or otherwise of the assertion.

An auditor picks up evidence from a variety of fields and it is generally of the
following broad types:

(a) Documentary examination

(b) Physical examination

(c) Statements and explanation of management, officials and employees

(d) Statements and explanations of third parties

(e) Arithmetical calculations by the auditor

(f) State of internal controls and internal checks

(g) Inter-relationship of the various accounting data

(h) Subsidiary and memorandum records

(i) Minutes

(j) Subsequent action by the client and by others.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.23
                                                PROGRAMME

Example

1. For cash in hand, the best evidence is `count'.

2. For investment pledged with a bank, the banker's certificate.

3. For verifying assertions about book debts, the client's ledger invoices, debit
       notes, credit notes, monthly accounts statement sent to the customers are all
       evidence: some of these are corroborative, other being complementary. In
       addition, balance confirmation procedure is often resorted to, to obtain
       greater satisfaction about the reliability of the assertion.

The auditor, however, has to place appropriate weight on each piece of evidence
and accordingly should prescribe the priority of verification. It is true that in all
cases one procedure may not bring the highest satisfaction and it may be
dangerous for the auditor to ignore any evidence that is available. By the word
"available", we do not mean that the evidence available with the client is the only
available evidence. The auditor should know what normally should be available in
the context of the transaction having regard to the circumstances and usage.

8.6 Advantages and disadvantages of an audit
      programme

The advantages of an audit programme are: -

(a) It provides the assistant carrying out the audit with total and clear set of
       instructions of the work generally to be done.

(b) It is essential, particularly for major audits, to provide a total perspective of
       the work to be performed.

(c) Selection of assistants for the jobs on the basis of capability becomes easier
       when the work is rationally planned, defined and segregated.

(d) Without a written and pre-determined programme, work is necessarily to be
       carried out on the basis of some `mental' plan. In such a situation there is
       always a danger of ignoring or overlooking certain books and records. Under
       a properly framed programme, such danger is significantly less and the audit
       can proceed systematically.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.24  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(e) The assistants, by putting their signature on programme, accept the
       responsibility for the work carried out by them individually and, if necessary,
       the work done may be traced back to the assistant.

(f) The principal can control the progress of the various audits in hand by
       examination of audit programmes initiated by the assistants deputed to the
       jobs for completed work.

(g) It serves as a guide for audits to be carried out in the succeeding year.

(h) A properly drawn up audit programme serves as evidence in the event of any
       charge of negligence being brought against the auditor. It may be of
       considerable value in establishing that he exercised reasonable skill and care
       that was expected of professional auditor.

Some disadvantages are also there in the use of audit programmes but most of
these can be removed by following some concrete steps.

The disadvantages are: -

(a) The work may become mechanical and particular parts of the programme
       may be carried out without any understanding of the object of such parts in
       the whole audit scheme.

(b) The programme often tends to become rigid and inflexible following set
       grooves; the business may change in its operation of conduct, but the old
       programme may still be carried on. Changes in staff or internal control may
       render precaution necessary at points different from those originally decided
       upon.

(c) Inefficient assistants may take shelter behind the programme i.e., defend
       deficiencies in their work on the ground that no instruction in the matter is
       contained therein.

(d) A hard and fast audit programme may kill the initiative of efficient and
       enterprising assistants.

All these disadvantages may be eliminated by imaginative supervision of the work
carried on by the assistants; the auditor must have a receptive attitude as regards
the assistants; the assistants should be encouraged to observe matters objectively
and bring significant matters to the notice of supervisor/principal.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                            2.25
                                                PROGRAMME

Test Your Understanding 5

Rohit, undergoing practical training, is part of an engagement team conducting
audit of a company engaged in manufacturing of paints. He has been provided with
audit programme pertaining to sales. It lists out various items to be checked and
verified by him including invoices, rate lists, posting in debtors accounts,
correlation of invoices with e-way bills on sample basis etc.

During verification, he notices that many e-way bills have been cancelled by the
company within 24 hours of their generation in month of March. There is no specific
instruction in audit programme in this regard. He keeps mum. Is attitude of Rohit
proper?

Extract of Sample audit programme pertaining to sales of an entity

Name of concern                                    Fine Industries

Financial year                                     2021-22

Prepared by                                        P (with date)

Reviewed by                                        Q (with date)

Approved by                                        R (with date)

 Serial           Nature of Procedure              Extent of        Basis of  Done by
number                                               Check          sample
         Vouch few sales invoices from
   (a)   copies available in record of the
         concern.
   (b)
   (c)   Trace these invoices into the
   (d)   account books of the concern.

   (e)   Verify few invoices with e-way bills
         generated on the e- way bill portal.

         Trace few sales invoices into the
         stock records to ensure that sold
         quantities have been reduced from
         stocks.

         Trace also few sales invoices into
         accounts of buyers

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.26  AUDITING AND ETHICS

CASE STUDY

Kaur & Associates, a sole proprietor firm of Simran Kaur, is offered appointment as
auditor of a company engaged in manufacturing of automobile components for
the first time. She is fact checking about the integrity of promoters of the company
and key managerial persons. Matters such as competence of staff to perform the
engagement are also considered by her. The appointment is subsequently accepted
by her.

She is also taking into account number and location of branches of the company,
requirements of Schedule III of the Companies Act, 2013 and expected time by
which audit has to be completed keeping in view statutory requirements. Initially,
she has thought it proper to inquire key employees of the company in procurement
and marketing departments and planned for the same. She has also planned to visit
three plants of the company. The purpose of planned inquiry and visit is to identify
and assess risk of material misstatements.

A detailed set of instructions has been prepared by her office and it has been
handed over to assistants in engagement team. These set of instructions include
details of extent of checking and nature of audit procedures to be performed
regarding purchases, sales, items of income, items of expenditure etc. During the
course of execution of above set of instructions, it has been brought to her notice
that company is also producing substantial quantities of scrap generated during
manufacturing process. However, no instructions have been given to engagement
team in this regard.

Based on above, answer following questions:

1. Auditor is fact checking about promoters and key managerial persons. She is
       also considering competence of staff to perform engagement. What is she trying
       to do?

       (a) She is establishing audit strategy.

       (b) She is conducting preliminary engagement activities.

       (c) She is designing audit plan.

       (d) She is checking her compliance of ethical requirements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.27
                                                PROGRAMME

2. Consideration of number and location of branches, requirements of financial
       reporting framework and expected time of completion are relevant factors
       primarily for which of the following -
       (a) Developing audit plan
       (b) Establishing overall audit strategy
       (c) Designing audit programme
       (d) Designing risk assessment procedures

3. Taking into account description of planned inquiry and visit, which of the
       following statements is TRUE?
       (a) Planned inquiry and visit fall in area of audit strategy.
       (b) Planned inquiry and visit are planned risk assessment procedures and fall
               in field of audit plan.
       (c) The said description is not related to audit planning.
       (d) Planned inquiry and visit fall in scope of audit programme.

4. What is detailed set of instructions given to assistants in engagement team
       known as?
       (a) Audit guidelines
       (b) Audit plan
       (c) Audit Programme
       (d) Audit Procedures

5. The issue of generation of scrap has been overlooked in detailed set of
       instructions given to engagement team. What should be proper course of action
       by CA Simran Kaur?
       (a) She should ignore this information as audit has already begun.
       (b) She should modify earlier set of instructions.
       (c) She should leave the matter to wisdom of engagement team.
       (d) She should put the ball in court of management as she was not provided
               with complete information earlier.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.28            AUDITING AND ETHICS

Answers to Questions involving case study

1.  (b) 2.  (b) 3.                                 (b) 4.  (c) 5.  (b)

SUMMARY

 SA-300 states that objective of the auditor is to plan the audit so that it will
       be performed in an effective manner.

 Planning is not a discrete phase of an audit, but rather a continual and iterative
       process.

 Elements of planning include preliminary engagement activities and planning
       activities.

 Preliminary engagement activities include performing procedures regarding
       continuance of client relationship, evaluating compliance with ethical
       requirements including independence and establishing an understanding of
       terms of engagement with the client so that there are no misunderstandings.

 Planning activities include establishing overall audit strategy and developing
       audit plan.

 Audit strategy sets scope, timing and direction of audit.

 Audit plan addresses various matters identified in overall audit strategy.

 Audit plan includes nature, timing and extent of planned risk assessment
       procedures, planned further audit procedures and planned other audit
       procedures in accordance with SAs.

 The establishment of the overall audit strategy and the detailed audit plan
       are not necessarily discrete or sequential processes, but are closely inter-
       related since changes in one may result in consequential changes to the
       other.

 Overall audit strategy, audit plan and changes made shall be documented by
       auditor.

 An audit programme consists of a series of verification procedures to be
       applied to the financial statements and accounts of a given entity for the
       purpose of obtaining sufficient evidence to enable the auditor to express an
       informed opinion on financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.29
                                                PROGRAMME

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQs based Questions

1. Which of the following is not considered in planning an audit generally?
       (a) Understanding of legal and regulatory framework of an entity
       (b) Need to consider determination of materiality
       (c) Evaluating audit evidence
       (d) Need to consider involvement of expert

2. Which of the following is true about audit plan?
       (a) Once an audit plan has been finalized for an engagement, changes
               cannot be made to it.
       (b) Audit plan includes scope, timing and direction of planned risk
               assessment procedures.
       (c) Changes in audit plan cannot lead to change in audit strategy.
       (d) Audit plan has to be documented by auditor.

3. Which of the following is not included in an audit programme normally?
       (a) Extent of checking
       (b) Date of checking
       (c) Nature or type of procedure
       (d) Planning of risk assessment procedures

4. Which of the following is not an advantage of an audit programme?
       (a) It acts as a guide for audit of coming years.
       (b) It fixes responsibility of assistants.
       (c) It serves as a shelter for assistants.
       (d) It serves a proof of work done by auditor.

5. Which of the following is most important principle for formulating an audit
       plan?
       (a) Gaining knowledge of client's workforce

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.30  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(b) Gaining knowledge of client's business
(c) Gaining knowledge of client's vendors
(d) Gaining knowledge of tax laws applicable to client

Correct/Incorrect

State with reasons (in short) whether the following statements are correct
or incorrect:
1. The establishment of the overall audit strategy and the detailed audit plan are

       not necessarily discrete or sequential processes, but are closely inter-related
       since changes in one may result in consequential changes to the other.

2. Establishing an overall audit strategy that sets the scope, timing and direction
       of the audit, and that guides the development of the audit plan is prerogative
       of the management.

3. Planning is a discrete phase of an audit.

4. A detailed Audit Programme once prepared for a business can be used for all
       business under all circumstances.

5. The audit plan is more detailed than the overall audit strategy.

Theoretical Questions

1. Discuss how performing preliminary engagement activities as part of planning
       an audit assists auditor.

2. Discuss how an engagement partner ensures that firm complies with relevant
       ethical requirements including independence in relation to client.

3. "Purported disadvantages of an audit programme can be overcome". Do you
       agree?

4. An auditor of a company fails to document audit strategy and audit plan. Briefly
       outline consequences of such failure.

5. SA 300 states that auditor shall plan the nature, timing and extent of direction
       and supervision of engagement team members and the review of their work.
       Discuss few factors affecting such supervision and review of work of
       engagement team members.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                           2.31
                                                PROGRAMME

ANSWERS/SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs based Questions

1.  (c) 2.  (d) 3.                                 (d) 4.  (c) 5.  (b)

Answers to Correct/Incorrect

1. Correct: Once the overall audit strategy has been established, an audit plan
       can be developed to achieve the audit objectives through the efficient use of
       the auditor's resources. The establishment of the overall audit strategy and
       the detailed audit plan are not necessarily discrete or sequential processes,
       but are closely inter-related since changes in one may result in consequential
       changes to the other.

2. Incorrect. The auditor shall establish an overall audit strategy that sets the
       scope, timing and direction of the audit, and that guides the development of
       the audit plan.

3. Incorrect. Planning is not a discrete phase of an audit, but rather a continual
       and iterative process that often begin shortly after (or in connection with) the
       completion of the previous audit and continues until the completion of the
       current audit engagement. Planning, however, includes consideration of the
       timing of certain activities and audit procedures that need to be completed
       prior to the performance of further audit procedures.

4. Incorrect. Businesses vary in nature, size and composition; work which is
       suitable to one business may not be suitable to others; efficiency and
       operation of internal controls and the exact nature of the service to be
       rendered by the auditor are the other factors that vary from assignment to
       assignment. On account of such variations, evolving one audit programme
       applicable to all business under all circumstances is not practicable.

5. Correct. The audit plan is more detailed than the overall audit strategy that
       includes the nature, timing and extent of audit procedures to be performed by
       engagement team members. Planning for these audit procedures takes place
       over the course of the audit as the audit plan for the engagement develops.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.32  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Answers to the Theoretical Questions

1. Performing preliminary engagement activities assists the auditor in
       identifying and evaluating events or circumstances that may affect auditor's
       ability to plan and perform audit engagement.

2. Refer to point on evaluating compliance with ethical requirements including
       independence.

3. Purported disadvantages of audit programme may be eliminated by
       imaginative supervision of the work carried on by the assistants; the auditor
       must have a receptive attitude as regards the assistants; the assistants should
       be encouraged to observe matters objectively and bring significant matters
       to the notice of supervisor/principal.

4. Refer to point on documentation

5. Refer to point on Planning supervision and review of work of engagement
       team members

Answers to Questions involving Test Your Understanding

1. Consideration for involvement of experts by auditors falls within domain of
       planning. While planning an audit, auditor would have to consider whether
       involvement of experts is necessary. In the stated case, company is involved
       in technical and complex operations. Therefore, while planning an audit,
       auditors would have to consider whether involvement of expert is necessary.

2. In the case, CA Kartik has reached office of the company without sharing with
       management his intention to test the controls. The auditor may decide to
       discuss elements of planning with the entity's management to facilitate the
       conduct and management of the audit engagement without compromising
       effectiveness of audit. Sharing details of visit to test controls does not
       compromise effectiveness of audit. It is for the better facilitation and conduct
       of audit. Therefore, approach of CA Kartik is not proper.

3. These are planned risk assessment procedures to identify and assess risk of
       material misstatement. The objective of planned inquiry of inhouse legal
       counsel is to identify and assess risk of material misstatement. Such planned
       risk assessment procedures are included in audit plan in accordance with
       SA-300.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT STRATEGY, AUDIT PLANNING AND AUDIT                   2.33
                                                PROGRAMME

4. Changes in laws and regulations affecting the company is a factor to be
       considered while establishing overall audit strategy. There has been change
       in information technology regulations applicable to the company. Non-
       compliance of the same can have implications in form of civil and criminal
       liabilities. Such an important matter concerning changes in laws and
       regulations is to be considered by auditor while establishing overall audit
       strategy.

5. Attitude of Rohit is not proper. The assistants should observe matters
       objectively and bring significant matters to the notice of supervisor/principal.
       Reasons for cancellation of many e-way bills in month of March need to be
       looked into. Matter should be informed to engagement partner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
