CHAPTER  11

ETHICS AND TERMS
OF AUDIT
ENGAGEMENTS

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand-

 Meaning of "Ethics"
 Need for Professional Ethics
 Fundamental Principles of Professional Ethics
 Independence of Auditors
 Threats to Independence
 Safeguards to Independence
 Professional Skepticism
 SA 210 Agreeing the Terms of Audit Engagement
 About Preconditions for an Audit
 Basic overview of SQC 1
 Basic overview of SA 220
 Practicality of above concepts using examples and case studies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.2          AUDITING AND ETHICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

Independence      Independence                                  AUDITOR'S
   of MIND                in                                 INDEPENDENCE

                  APPEARANCE

  Self-                                              Self-
Interest                                           Review
Threats                                            Threats

                  Threats

                      To
              Independence

Intimidation                                       Advocacy
   Threats                                          Threats

              Familiarity
                Threats

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.3

Human civilization is built upon ethics. We cannot think of our daily lives without
ethics. Think of any endeavour of human activity- be it imparting of education,
running a business, engaging in a profession or carrying out public administration
affairs- ethics have a role to play in every field. Ethics guide us and help in building
trust.

Consider the case of business. Can a company which does not take care of its
workforce or hear its customers achieve heights in its respective trade? A business
which dishes out substandard products instead of promised ones would not be
able to stay in market for too long. Or take the case of a lawyer who fails to attend
legal proceedings of a client without reasonable cause putting his client's interests
in jeopardy. Is his conduct ethical? Ultimately, such unprofessional behaviour would
tarnish his reputation and credibility.

Sameer was trying to understand importance of ethics in profession of Chartered
Accountancy. He was wondering whether a code of ethics exists for Chartered
accountants and if so, how exhaustive it would be. Based upon his understanding
of auditing till now, he was certain that an auditor must comply with ethical
requirements while conducting audit of financial statements. He knew that auditor
should be a person of unimpeachable integrity. He gives opinion on financial
statements of entities and to maintain sanctity and credibility of his signatures, it is
necessary that an auditor should comply with ethics.

A parallel stream of thoughts was also gaining momentum in his mind. Should an
auditor follow only those requirements which have been clearly laid down in the
rule book? What about situations for which little has been laid down? Thinking
about "independence" of auditors, he seemed pretty sure that it was not possible
to codify every situation affecting independence of auditor. What approach should
auditor follow so that users continue to repose faith? Is there more than one
perspective of concept of "independence"? And most importantly, how should an
auditor proceed in a situation where he finds his "independence" on a sticky wicket
due to extraneous factors?

Performing professional work following ethics also leads to qualitative audits
conforming to professional standards. Are there any pronouncements on quality
control to be followed by Chartered Accountants? He was yearning to learn about
these.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.4  AUDITING AND ETHICS

    1. MEANING OF ETHICS ­ A STATE OF MIND

The term "Ethics" means moral principles which govern a person's behaviour or his
conducting of an activity. It is the branch of knowledge that deals with moral
principles. Ethics is something which comes from an individual intrinsically. It has
to be inculcated in the habit and temperament of an individual, so that there is an
overall culture of ethics; the force has to be strong enough to withstand any selfish
motive or temptation. It is a state of mind to act and perform in accordance with
moral principles. Ethics is the science of morals in human conduct. Such moral
principles and rules of conduct impose obligations upon individuals.

    2. NEED FOR PROFESSIONAL ETHICS

Professions like law, medicine have their code of ethics. Auditing profession is no
exception. Rather, in the profession of auditing, requirement of ethics is manifold.
It is due to the reason that society in general, governments, clients, taxing
authorities, employees, investors, the business and financial community in
particular, have reposed tremendous trust in services rendered by Chartered
Accountants.

The purpose of assurance engagements is to enhance confidence of the intended
users. Therefore, users need to trust the person who is providing such services.

Professional ethics are based on morality. Human nature being what it is, a man,
often, places his personal gain above service. Therefore, persons who as individuals
and as a class, are willing to place public good above their personal gain have
enjoyed respect and honour. But such a relationship can be maintained or
enhanced only if the professional body to which they belong would interpret the
concept of public interest as broadly as possible. The respect and confidence
enjoyed by a profession, to a great extent, is dependent on the strictness and
scrupulousness with which such ethics are adhered to by self-discipline.

A distinguishing feature of the accountancy profession is its acceptance of the
responsibility to act in the public interest. Professional ethics seek to protect the
interests of the profession as a whole and act as a shield that enables us to
command respect.

A Chartered Accountant, either in practice or in service, has to abide by ethical
behaviours. They are expected to follow the fundamental principles of professional

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.5

ethics while performing their duties. Service users of professionals should be able
to feel secure that there exists a framework of professional ethics which governs
the provision of those services.

It is in this spirit of things that the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)
requires its members to comply with the principles of ethics while performing their
duties. The ethics for Chartered Accountants have, therefore, been codified as
ethical compliance has always been a philosophy of the profession. Chartered
accountants, whether in practice or in service, are required to comply with the
provisions of Code of Ethics.

Any deviation from the ethical responsibilities brings the disciplinary mechanism
into action against the Chartered Accountants which may result into fines,
suspension of membership, removal from membership or other disciplinary actions.

    3. PRINCIPLES BASED APPROACH VS RULES
          BASED APPROACH TO ETHICS (ETHICAL OR
          LEGAL)

Ethical guidance may follow principles-based approach or rules-based approach.
The essence of principles-based approach to ethics is that it requires compliance
with spirit of ethics. It requires accountants to exercise professional judgment in
every situation based upon their professional knowledge, skill and expertise. It
requires that accountants should use professional judgment to evaluate every
situation to arrive at conclusions.

However, rules-based approach to ethics strictly follows clearly established rules. It
may lead to a narrow outlook and spirit of ethics may be overlooked while strictly
adhering to rules. Further, rules- based approach is somewhat rigid as it may not
be possible to deal with every practical situation relying upon rules.

Therefore, it is necessary that spirit of code is followed.

    4. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF PROFESSIONAL
          ETHICS

The fundamental principles of ethics establish the standard of behaviour expected

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.6  AUDITING AND ETHICS

of a professional accountant. A professional accountant shall comply with each of
the fundamental principles. The fundamental principles of professional ethics are
as under: -

      Integrity

          Objectivity

         Professional
      competence and

            due care

       Confidentiality

      Professional
       Behaviour

1. Integrity

       A professional accountant shall comply with the principle of integrity, which
       requires an accountant to be straightforward and honest in all professional
       and business relationships. Integrity implies fair dealing and truthfulness.

       A professional accountant shall not knowingly be associated with reports,
       returns, communications or other information where the accountant believes
       that the information contains a materially false or misleading statement;
       contains statements or information provided negligently or omits or obscures
       required information where such omission or obscurity would be misleading.

2. Objectivity

       The principle of objectivity requires an auditor not to compromise
       professional judgment because of bias, conflict of interest or undue influence
       of others.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.7

       It requires that a professional accountant shall not undertake a professional
       activity if a circumstance or relationship unduly influences the accountant's
       professional judgment regarding that activity.

3. Professional competence and due care

       A professional accountant shall comply with the principle of professional
       competence and due care, which requires an accountant to attain and
       maintain professional knowledge and skill at the level required to ensure that
       a client or employing organization receives competent professional service,
       based on current technical and professional standards and relevant
       legislation; and act diligently and in accordance with applicable technical and
       professional standards.

       Diligence includes responsibility to act carefully, thoroughly and on a timely
       basis in accordance with requirements of an assignment.

4. Confidentiality

       Confidentiality principle requires a professional accountant to respect the
       confidentiality of information acquired as a result of professional or business
       relationships. Confidentiality serves the public interest because it facilitates
       the free flow of information from the professional accountant's client or
       employing organization to the accountant with the understanding that the
       information will not be disclosed to a third party.

       However, such confidential information may be disclosed, for example, when
       it is required by law, when it is permitted by law and is authorised by the
       client or employer or there is a professional duty or right to disclose when
       not prohibited by law.

5. Professional Behaviour

       It requires an accountant to comply with relevant laws and regulations and
       avoid any conduct that the accountant knows or should know might discredit
       the profession. A professional accountant shall not knowingly engage in any
       employment, occupation or activity that impairs or might impair the integrity,
       objectivity or good reputation of the profession, and as a result would be
       incompatible with the fundamental principles.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Test Your Understanding 1

CA P. Suryakantam has conducted audit of accounts of an entity for a particular
year. ICAI has issued a letter to him relating to certain matters concerning audit. He
didn't even bother to reply to the letter despite reminders. Discuss which
fundamental principle governing professional ethics is disregarded by him.

Test Your Understanding 2

A Chartered accountant in practice issued a certificate showing original cost of
plant and machinery installed in premises of a client for Rs. 9 crores to save some
regulatory fees for his client. However, original cost of plant and machinery was
Rs.15 crore as per records of client. Which fundamental principle governing
professional ethics is violated in this case?

    5. INDEPENDENCE OF AUDITORS

Professional integrity and independence are essential characteristics of all the
professions but are more so in the case of accountancy profession. Independence
implies that the judgement of a person is not subordinate to the wishes or direction
of another person who might have engaged him, or to his own self-interest.

It is not possible to define "independence" precisely. Rules of professional conduct
dealing with independence are framed primarily with a certain objective. The rules,
by themselves, cannot create or ensure the existence of independence.
Independence is a condition of mind as well as personal character and should not
be confused with the superficial and visible standards of independence which are
sometimes imposed by law. These legal standards may be relaxed or strengthened
but the quality of independence remains unaltered.

There are two interlinked perspectives of independence of auditors, one,
independence of mind and two, independence in appearance.

Independence is:

(a) Independence of mind ­ the state of mind that permits the provision of an
       opinion without being affected by influences that compromise professional
       judgment, allowing an individual to act with integrity, and exercise objectivity
       and professional skepticism; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.9

(b) Independence in appearance ­ the avoidance of facts and circumstances
       that are so significant that a reasonable and informed third party, having
       knowledge of all relevant information, including any safeguards applied,
       would reasonably conclude a firm's, or a member of the assurance team's,
       integrity, objectivity or professional skepticism had been compromised.

       Independence of the auditor has not only to exist in fact, but also appear to
       so exist to all reasonable persons. The relationship between the auditor and
       his client should be such that firstly, he is himself satisfied about his
       independence and secondly, no unbiased person would be forced to the
       conclusion that, on an objective assessment of the circumstances, there is
       likely to be an abridgement of the auditors' independence.

       Independence of an auditor assumes significance in context of providing
       confidence to users of financial statements. As statutory auditor of a listed
       company, for example, the Chartered Accountant would cease to perform any
       useful function if the persons who rely upon the accounts of the company do
       not have any faith in the independence and integrity of the Chartered
       Accountant. In such cases, he is expected to be objective in his approach,
       fearless, and capable of expressing an honest opinion based upon the
       performance of work such as his training and experience enables him to do
       so.

       Independence is dependent on the state of mind and character of a person and
       is a very subjective matter. One person might be independent in a particular set
       of circumstances, while another person might feel he is not independent in
       similar circumstances. It is therefore the duty of every Chartered Accountant to
       determine for himself whether or not he can act independently in the given
       circumstances of a case and quite apart from legal rules, in no case to place
       himself in a position which would compromise his independence.

    6. THREATS TO INDEPENDENCE

Many different circumstances, or combination of circumstances, may be relevant
and accordingly it is impossible to define every situation that creates threats to
independence and specify the appropriate mitigating action that should be taken.
In addition, the nature of assurance engagements may differ and consequently
different threats may exist requiring the application of different safeguards.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.10  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Following five types of threats to independence of auditors are discussed
below: -

1. Self-interest threats

       Self-interest threats occur when an auditing firm, its partner or associate
       could benefit from a financial interest in an audit client. Examples include

       (i) direct financial interest or materially significant indirect financial interest in
               a client

       (ii) loan or guarantee to or from the concerned client

       (iii) undue dependence on a client's fees and, hence, concerns about losing
               the engagement

       (iv) close business relationship with an audit client

       (v) potential employment with the client and

       (vi) contingent fees for the audit engagement

2. Self-review threats

       Self-review threats occur when during a review of any judgement or
       conclusion reached in a previous audit or non-audit engagement, or when a
       member of the audit team was previously a director or senior employee of
       the client. Non audit services include any professional services provided to an
       entity by an auditor, other than audit or review of the financial statements.
       These include management services, internal audit, investment advisory
       service etc. Instances where such threats come into play are: -

       (i) when an auditor having recently been a director or senior officer of the
               company.

       (ii) when auditors perform services that are themselves subject matters of
               audit.

3. Advocacy threats

       Advocacy threats occur when the auditor promotes, or is perceived to
       promote, a client's opinion to a point where people may believe that
       objectivity is getting compromised, e.g., when an auditor deals with shares or
       securities of the audited company, or becomes the client's advocate in
       litigation and third party disputes. In such situations, auditor can be perceived

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.11

       as backing and championing causes of auditee client and it may lead to belief
       that auditor is not acting and working objectively.

4. Familiarity threats

       Familiarity threats are self-evident, and occur when auditors form
       relationships with the client where they end up being too sympathetic to the
       client's interests. This can occur in many ways including:

       (i) close relative of the audit team working in a senior position in the client
               company

       (ii) former partner of the audit firm being a director or senior employee of the
               client

       (iii) long association between specific auditors and their specific client
               counterparts and

       (iv) acceptance of significant gifts or hospitality from the client company, its
               directors or employees.

       Provisions in the Companies Act, 2013 regarding rotation of auditors
       mainly address these very familiarity threats. Such provisions prescribe
       that auditor is rotated after a certain number of years so that auditors do not
       become too familiar with their clients.

5. Intimidation threats

       Intimidation threats occur when auditors are deterred from acting objectively
       with an adequate degree of professional skepticism. Basically, these could
       happen because of threat of replacement over disagreements with the
       application of accounting principles, or pressure to disproportionately reduce
       work in response to reduced audit fees or being threatened with litigation. Such
       threats attempt to intimidate auditors to deter them from acting objectively.

    7. SAFEGUARDS TO INDEPENDENCE

Chartered Accountants have a responsibility to remain independent by taking into
account the context in which they practice, the threats to independence and the
safeguards available to address the threats.

Safeguards are actions, individually or in combination, that the professional
accountant takes that effectively reduce threats to comply with the fundamental
principles to an acceptable level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.12  AUDITING AND ETHICS

To address the issue, the following guiding principles are to be applied: -

· For the public to have confidence in the quality of audit, it is essential that
       auditors should always be and appears to be independent of the entities that
       they are auditing.

· Before taking on any work, an auditor must conscientiously consider whether it
       involves threats to his independence.

· When such threats exist, the auditor should either desist from the task or
       eliminate the threat or at the very least, put in place safeguards which reduce
       the threats to an acceptable level. All such safeguards measures need to be
       recorded in a form that can serve as evidence of compliance with due process.

· If the auditor is unable to fully implement credible and adequate safeguards,
       then he must not accept the work.

Note: For more details on threats and safeguards, refer to additional material on
BoS Knowledge portal.

    8. PROFESSIONAL SKEPTICISM

Professional skepticism refers to an attitude that includes a questioning mind,
being alert to conditions which may indicate possible misstatement due to error or
fraud, and a critical assessment of audit evidence.

It signifies that auditor has to remain alert forever. The auditor's attitude should be
of questioning mind- of challenging the things in light of available evidence.

The auditor shall plan and perform an audit with professional skepticism
recognising that circumstances may exist that cause the financial statements to be
materially misstated.

Professional skepticism includes being alert to, for example:

· Audit evidence that contradicts other audit evidence obtained.

· Information that brings into question the reliability of documents and responses
       to inquiries to be used as audit evidence.

· Conditions that may indicate possible fraud.

· Circumstances that suggest the need for audit procedures in addition to those
       required by the SAs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.13

Maintaining professional skepticism throughout the audit is necessary if the
auditor is to reduce the risks of:

· Overlooking unusual circumstances.

· Over generalising when drawing conclusions from audit observations.

· Using inappropriate assumptions in determining the nature, timing, and extent
       of the audit procedures and evaluating the results thereof.

Professional skepticism is necessary to the critical assessment of audit evidence. It
also includes consideration of the sufficiency and appropriateness of audit evidence
obtained in the light of the circumstances, for example in the case where fraud risk
factors exist and a single document, of a nature that is susceptible to fraud, is the
sole supporting evidence for a material financial statement amount. The auditor
may accept records and documents as genuine unless the auditor has reason to
believe the contrary.

Nevertheless, the auditor is required to consider the reliability of information to be
used as audit evidence. In cases of doubt about the reliability of information or
indications of possible fraud, the SAs require that the auditor investigate further
and determine what modifications or additions to audit procedures are necessary
to resolve the matter.

The auditor cannot be expected to disregard past experience of the honesty and
integrity of the entity's management and those charged with governance.
Nevertheless, a belief that management and those charged with governance are
honest and have integrity does not relieve the auditor of the need to maintain
professional skepticism.

Test Your Understanding 3

CA Raman Gupta is offered appointment as auditor of a company. One of his distant
uncles held some shares in the same company. Holding of such shares, by a distant
relative, is not prohibited under provisions of law nor does it affect his
independence. Before he could accept appointment, he received unfortunate news
of death of his uncle who had died without any children. He came to know that he
was nominee of these shares having substantial value. It landed him in a tricky
situation. What should be proper course of action for him?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.14  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Test Your Understanding 4

A Chartered accountant receives about 40% of his total audit fees from a single
client. Discuss how it could affect independence of Chartered accountant as
auditor of this client. What are such types of threats referred to as?

Test Your Understanding 5

CA Murli Madhavan provides accounting and book keeping services to a leading
NGO engaged in environmental protection work. He is also offered audit of the
accounts of NGO. Identify and discuss what kind of threat to independence may be
involved in accepting such an engagement.

Test Your Understanding 6

The auditors of a company have only relied upon management representation
letter regarding treatment of certain tax matters under appeal by the company. The
auditors have not carried out any other audit procedures to justify management's
treatment of the said tax matters under appeal in the financial statements. What is
lacking on part of auditors in such a situation?

AUDIT ENGAGEMENT AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENT

An audit engagement involves engaging an auditor by a client for audit of its
financial statements. Audit engagement terms can include matters such as
objective and scope of audit of financial statements, responsibilities of auditor,
responsibilities of management, identification of applicable financial reporting
framework for preparation of financial statements and reference to expected form
and contents of report to be issued by auditor.

    9. AGREEING THE TERMS OF AUDIT
          ENGAGEMENTS

SA 210 deals with the auditor's responsibilities in agreeing the terms of the audit
engagement with management and, where appropriate, those charged with
governance. This includes establishing that certain preconditions for an audit,
responsibility for which rests with management and, where appropriate, those
charged with governance, are present.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS        11.15

The objective of the auditor is to accept or continue an audit engagement only
when the basis upon which it is to be performed has been agreed, through:

(A) Establishing whether the preconditions for an audit are present and

(B) Confirming that there is a common understanding between the auditor and
       management and, where appropriate, those charged with governance of the
       terms of the audit engagement.

9A Preconditions for an audit

As per SA 210 "Agreeing the Terms of Audit Engagements", preconditions for
an audit may be defined as the use by management of an acceptable financial
reporting framework in the preparation of the financial statements and the
agreement of management and, where appropriate, those charged with
governance to the premise on which an audit is conducted.

                                    Preconditions for an audit

Use by management     in the preparation of  and the agreement of
  of an acceptable         the financial      management to the
 financial reporting        statements       premise on which an
      framework                                audit is conducted

In order to establish whether the preconditions for an audit are present, the
auditor shall:
(a) Determine whether the financial reporting framework is acceptable and
(b) Obtain the agreement of management that it acknowledges and understands

       its responsibility:
       (i) For the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the

               applicable financial reporting framework including where relevant their
               fair representation;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.16  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (ii) For such internal control as management considers necessary to enable
               the preparation of financial statements that are free from material
               misstatement, whether due to fraud or error; and

       (iii) To provide the auditor with:

                Access to all information of which management is aware that is
                       relevant to the preparation of the financial statements such as
                       records, documentation and other matters;

                Additional information that the auditor may request from
                       management for the purpose of the audit; and

                Unrestricted access to persons within the entity from whom the
                       auditor determines it necessary to obtain audit evidence.

9B. Agreement on audit engagement terms

Except in the cases where it is required under law to get accounts audited (for
example in case of companies), audit is a matter of contract between auditor and
client. It is, therefore, important, both for the auditor and client, that each party
should be clear about the nature of the engagement. It must be reduced to writing
and should exactly specify the scope of the work.

The auditor shall agree the terms of the audit engagement with management or
those charged with governance, as appropriate. The agreed terms of the audit
engagement shall be recorded in an audit engagement letter or other suitable form
of written agreement.

The audit engagement letter is sent by the auditor to his client. It is in the interest
of both the auditor and the client to issue an engagement letter so that the
possibility of misunderstanding is reduced to a great extent. Such a letter includes:-

(a) The objective and scope of the audit of the financial statements

(b) The responsibilities of the auditor

(c) The responsibilities of management

(d) Identification of the applicable financial reporting framework for the
       preparation of the financial statements and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS                   11.17

(e) Reference to the expected form and content of any reports to be issued by
       the auditor and a statement that there may be circumstances in which a
       report may differ from its expected form and content.

If law or regulation prescribes in sufficient detail the terms of the audit
engagement, the auditor need not record them in a written agreement, except for
the fact that such law or regulation applies and that management acknowledges
and understands its responsibilities.

10. EXAMPLE OF AN ENGAGEMENT LETTER

Given below is example of an engagement letter: -

PJ Shrimali & Co.                                       24, MG Road,
Chartered Accountants                                   Mumbai
                                                        10th August XXXX
To the Board of Directors of Pristine Products Limited
The objective and scope of the audit

You have requested that we audit the financial statements of Pristine Products
Limited, which comprise the Balance Sheet as at March 31st, 20XX, the Statement
of Profit & Loss, Cash Flow Statement for the year then ended, and notes to the
financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies and
other explanatory information.

We are pleased to confirm our acceptance and our understanding of this audit
engagement by means of this letter. The objectives of our audit are to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an
auditor's report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of
assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with
Standards on Auditing (SAs) will always detect a material misstatement when it
exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if,
individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence
the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.18  AUDITING AND ETHICS

The responsibilities of the auditor

We will conduct our audit in accordance with Standards on Auditing (SAs) issued
by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). Those Standards require
that we comply with ethical requirements. As part of an audit in accordance with
SAs, we exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism
throughout the audit. We also:

· Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial

       statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit
       procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is
       sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not
       detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for
       one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional
       omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.

· Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order

       to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances but
       not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
       company's internal control. However, we will communicate to you in writing
       concerning any significant deficiencies in internal control relevant to the
       audit of the financial statements that we have identified during the audit.

· Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the

       reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by
       management.

· Conclude on the appropriateness of management's use of the going

       concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained,
       whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that
       may cast significant doubt on the company's ability to continue as a going
       concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required
       to draw attention in our auditor's report to the related disclosures in the
       financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our
       opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to
       the date of our auditor's report. However, future events or conditions may
       cause the company to cease to continue as a going concern.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.19

· Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial

       statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements
       represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves
       fair presentation.

Because of the inherent limitations of an audit, together with the inherent
limitations of internal control, there is an unavoidable risk that some material
misstatements may not be detected, even though the audit is properly planned
and performed in accordance with SAs.

The responsibilities of management

Our audit will be conducted on the basis that management and, where
appropriate, those charged with governance acknowledge and understand that
they have responsibility:

(a) For the preparation of financial statements that give a true and fair view in
       accordance with the financial reporting Standards. This includes:

       · The responsibility for the preparation of financial statements on a
               going concern basis.

       · The responsibility for selection and consistent application of
               appropriate accounting policies, including implementation of
               applicable accounting standards along with proper explanation
               relating to any material departures from those accounting standards.

       · The responsibility for making judgements and estimates that are
               reasonable and prudent so as to give a true and fair view of the state
               of affairs of the entity at the end of the financial year and of the profit
               or loss of the entity for that period.

(b) For such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable
       the preparation of financial statements that are free from material
       misstatement, whether due to fraud or error and

(c) To provide us with:

       (i) Access, at all times, to all information, including the books, accounts,
              vouchers and other records and documentation, of the company,
              whether kept at the head office of the company or elsewhere, of which
              management is aware that is relevant to the preparation of the financial
              statements such as records, documentation and other matters,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.20                 AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (ii) Additional information that we may request from management for the
              purpose of the audit and

       (iii) Unrestricted access to persons within the entity from whom we
              determine it necessary to obtain audit evidence. This includes our
              entitlement to require from the officers of the company such
              information and explanations as we may think necessary for the
              performance of our duties as auditor. As part of our audit process, we
              will request from management and, where appropriate, those charged
              with governance, written confirmation concerning representations
              made to us in connection with the audit.

Fees

Our fees bill for ` XXXXXX (plus applicable taxes) and out of pocket expenses will
be raised after completion of audit work.

Reporting

We will report to the members of Pristine Products Limited as a body, whether in
our opinion, the financial statements give the information required by the
Companies Act, 2013 in the manner so required and give a true and fair view in
conformity with the accounting principles generally accepted in India, of the state
of affairs of the company as at March 31, 20XX, and its profit/loss, and its cash
flows for the year ended on that date. The form and content of our report may
need to be amended in the light of our audit findings.

Please sign and return the attached copy of this letter to indicate your
acknowledgement of, and agreement with, the arrangements for our audit of the
financial statements including our respective responsibilities.

For PJ Shrimali & Co.

Chartered Accountants

Firm's Registration Number

(Signature)
(Name of the Member)
(Designation)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS  11.21

    11. WHAT HAPPENS IF PRECONDITIONS FOR
          AN AUDIT ARE NOT PRESENT?

If the preconditions for an audit are not present, the auditor shall discuss the matter
with management. Unless required by law or regulation to do so, the auditor shall
not accept the proposed audit engagement: -

(a) If the auditor has determined that the financial reporting framework to be
       applied in the preparation of the financial statements is unacceptable or

(b) If the agreement of management is not obtained on matters relating to
       understanding of responsibility of management on preparation of financial
       statements, internal controls for preparation of financial statements,
       providing access to all information to auditor and unrestricted access to
       persons within the entity.

    12. LIMITATION ON SCOPE PRIOR TO AUDIT
          ENGAGEMENT ACCEPTANCE

If management or those charged with governance impose a limitation on the scope
of the auditor's work in the terms of a proposed audit engagement such that the
auditor believes the limitation will result in the auditor disclaiming an opinion on
the financial statements, the auditor shall not accept such a limited engagement as
an audit engagement, unless required by law or regulation to do so.

    13. ACCEPTANCE OF A CHANGE IN THE TERMS
          OF THE AUDIT ENGAGEMENT

The auditor shall not agree to a change in the terms of the audit engagement where
there is no reasonable justification for doing so.

13.1 Request from Entity to change the Terms of Audit
      Engagement-When Reasonable Justification Exists?

A request from the entity for the auditor to change the terms of the audit
engagement may result from a change in circumstances affecting the need for the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.22  AUDITING AND ETHICS

service, a misunderstanding as to the nature of an audit as originally requested or
a restriction on the scope of the audit engagement, whether imposed by
management or caused by other circumstances. The auditor considers the
justification given for the request, particularly the implications of a restriction on
the scope of the audit engagement.

A change in circumstances that affects the entity's requirements or a
misunderstanding concerning the nature of the service originally requested may be
considered a reasonable basis for requesting a change in the audit engagement.

In contrast, a change may not be considered reasonable if it appears that the change
relates to information that is incorrect, incomplete or otherwise unsatisfactory.

An example might be where the auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate
audit evidence regarding receivables and the entity asks for the audit engagement
to be changed to a review engagement to avoid a qualified opinion or a disclaimer
of opinion.

13.2 What should auditor consider before agreeing to
      change the audit engagement to the engagement
      providing lower level of assurance?

If, prior to completing the audit engagement, the auditor is requested to change
the audit engagement to an engagement that conveys a lower level of assurance,
the auditor shall determine whether there is reasonable justification for doing so.

Before agreeing to change an audit engagement to a review or a related service,
an auditor who was engaged to perform an audit in accordance with SAs may also
need to assess any legal or contractual implications of the change.

If the auditor concludes that there is reasonable justification to change the audit
engagement to a review or a related service, the audit work performed to the date
of change may be relevant to the changed engagement. However, the work
required to be performed and the report to be issued would be those appropriate
to the revised engagement. In order to avoid confusing the reader, the report on
the related service would not include reference to:

(a) The original audit engagement or

(b) Any procedures that may have been performed in the original audit
       engagement, except where the audit engagement is changed to an

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.23

       engagement to undertake agreed- upon procedures and thus reference to
       the procedures performed is a normal part of the report.

If the terms of the audit engagement are changed, the auditor and management
shall agree on and record the new terms of the engagement in an engagement
letter or other suitable form of written agreement.

13.3 Recourse available to auditor in situation of non-
      agreement to a change in terms of engagement and lack
      of permission from management to continue original
      audit engagement

If the auditor is unable to agree to a change of the terms of the audit engagement
and is not permitted by management to continue the original audit engagement,
the auditor shall:

(a) Withdraw from the audit engagement where possible under applicable law
       or regulation and

(b) Determine whether there is any obligation, either contractual or otherwise, to
       report the circumstances to other parties, such as those charged with
       governance, owners or regulators.

    14. TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT IN RECURRING
          AUDITS

Recurring audit is an audit which is performed by an auditor over years. On
recurring audits, the auditor shall assess whether circumstances require the terms
of the audit engagement to be revised and whether there is a need to remind the
entity of the existing terms of the audit engagement.

The auditor may decide not to send a new audit engagement letter or other written
agreement each period. However, the following factors may make it appropriate to
revise the terms of the audit engagement or to remind the entity of existing terms:

(i) Any indication that the entity misunderstands the objective and scope of the
       audit.

(ii) Any revised or special terms of the audit engagement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.24  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(iii) A recent change of senior management.

(iv) A significant change in ownership.

(v) A significant change in nature or size of the entity's business.

(vi) A change in legal or regulatory requirements.

(vii) A change in the financial reporting framework adopted in the preparation of
       the financial statements.

(viii) A change in other reporting requirements.

Test Your Understanding 7

Chirag, as part of articled training, is part of an engagement team conducting audit
of a company. He has read somewhere that engagement letter issued by auditor to
client also includes expected form and content of the auditor's report. He was at a
loss to understand how could an auditor include form and content of the report
beforehand. Try to help Chirag by making things clear to him.

Test Your Understanding 8

The management of an entity feels that it is not necessary for it to give in writing
explicitly to the auditor that it understands its responsibilities for preparation of
financial statements in accordance with applicable financial reporting framework.
Discuss, whether, it is necessary for the management to do so. In case management
refuses, why should an auditor not accept the proposed engagement?

    15. AUDIT QUALITY

The purpose of an independent audit is to provide confidence to users of audited
financial statements. Therefore, high audit quality is essential to maintain
confidence in the independent assurance provided by the auditors. It is the
responsibility of auditor to maintain high audit quality.

SQC 1 and SA 220 both deal with quality control. Whereas SQC 1 deals with all
engagements including audits, reviews and other assurance and related service
engagements, SA 220 applies to audit engagements only.

Further, SQC 1 applies to entire firm. However, SA 220 applies to a particular audit
engagement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.25

    16. SQC 1 ­ "QUALITY CONTROL FOR FIRMS
          THAT PERFORM AUDITS AND REVIEWS OF
          HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION,
          AND OTHER ASSURANCE AND RELATED
          SERVICES ENGAGEMENTS"

SQC 1 requires that the firm should establish a system of quality control designed
to provide it with reasonable assurance that the firm and its personnel comply with
professional standards and regulatory and legal requirements and that reports
issued by the firm or engagement partners are appropriate in the circumstances.
Firm's system of quality control should consist of policies designed to achieve these
objectives.

    17. ELEMENTS OF SYSTEM OF QUALITY
          CONTROL

The firm's system of quality control should include policies and procedures
addressing each of the following elements: -

(A) Leadership responsibilities for quality within the firm

(B) Ethical requirements

(C) Acceptance and continuance of client relationships and specific engagements

(D) Human resources

(E) Engagement performance

(F) Monitoring

Quality control policies and procedures should be documented and communicated
to the firm's personnel. By communicating, the firm recognizes the importance of
obtaining feedback on its quality control system from its personnel. Therefore, the
firm encourages its personnel to communicate their views or concerns on quality
control matters.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.26  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Elements of a System of Quality Control: The firm's system of quality
control should include policies and procedures addressing each of the

                                    following elements:

              Leadership responsibilities for
                   quality within the firm.
                    Ethical requirements.

        Acceptance and continuance of client
       relationships and specific engagements.

                      Human resources.

                Engagement performance.

                          Monitoring.

17A. Leadership responsibilities for quality within the firm

SQC 1 requires firms to establish policies and procedures designed to promote an
internal culture based on the recognition that quality is essential in performing
engagements. Such policies and procedures should require the firm's chief
executive officer or the firm's managing partners to assume ultimate responsibility
for the firm's system of quality control. The example set by firm's leadership
encourages an inner culture that recognizes high quality audit work. Further,
persons assigned operational responsibilities for the firm's quality control system
by the firm's chief executive officer or managing partners should have sufficient
and appropriate experience, ability and the necessary authority to assume that
responsibility.

17B. Ethical requirements

The firm should establish policies and procedures designed to provide it with
reasonable assurance that the firm and its personnel comply with relevant ethical
requirements contained in the Code of ethics issued by ICAI.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.27

The Code establishes the fundamental principles of professional ethics which
include integrity, objectivity, professional competence and due care, confidentiality
and professional behaviour.

Observance of "Independence" in all engagements is the basic requirement. The
firm should establish policies and procedures designed to provide it with
reasonable assurance that the firm, its personnel and (including experts contracted
by the firm and network firm personnel) maintain independence where required by
the Code. Such policies and procedures should enable the firm to: -

(a) Communicate its independence requirements to its personnel

(b) Identify and evaluate circumstances and relationships that create threats to
       independence, and to take appropriate action to eliminate those threats or
       reduce them to an acceptable level by applying safeguards, or, if considered
       appropriate, to withdraw from the engagement.

There should exist a mechanism in the firm by which engagement partners provide
the firm with relevant information about client engagements and personnel of firm
promptly notify firm of circumstances and relationships that create a threat to
independence. All breaches of independence should be promptly notified to firm
for appropriate action. Its objective is to ensure that independence requirements
are satisfied.

At least annually, the firm should obtain written confirmation of compliance with
its policies and procedures on independence from all firm personnel required to be
independent in terms of the requirements of the Code.

17C. Acceptance and Continuance of Client Relationships
      and Specific Engagements

A firm before accepting an engagement should acquire vital information about the
client. Such an information should help firm to decide about: -

· Integrity of Client

· Competence (including capabilities, time and resources) to perform engagement

· Compliance with ethical requirements

The firm should obtain such information as it considers necessary in the
circumstances before accepting an engagement with a new client, when deciding

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.28  AUDITING AND ETHICS

whether to continue an existing engagement, and when considering acceptance of
a new engagement with an existing client. Where issues have been identified, and
the firm decides to accept or continue the client relationship or a specific
engagement, it should document how the issues were resolved.

With regard to the integrity of a client, matters that the firm considers include, for
example:

· The identity and business reputation of the client's principal owners, key
       management, related parties and those charged with its governance.

· The nature of the client's operations, including its business practices.

· Information concerning the attitude of the client's principal owners, key
       management and those charged with its governance towards such matters as
       aggressive interpretation of accounting standards and the internal control
       environment.

· Whether the client is aggressively concerned with maintaining the firm's fees as
       low as possible.

· Indications of an inappropriate limitation in the scope of work.

· Indications that the client might be involved in money laundering or other
       criminal activities.

· The reasons for the proposed appointment of the firm and non-reappointment
       of the previous firm.

If there is any conflict of interest between the firm and client, it should be properly
resolved before accepting the engagement. Where the firm obtains information
that would have caused it to decline an engagement if that information had been
obtainable earlier, policies and procedures on the continuance of the engagement
and the client relationship should include consideration of:

(a) The professional and legal responsibilities that apply to the circumstances,
       including whether there is a requirement for the firm to report to the person
       or persons who made the appointment or, in some cases, to regulatory
       authorities; and

(b) The possibility of withdrawing from the engagement or from both the
       engagement and the client relationship.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.29

17D. Human resources

The firm should establish policies and procedures designed to provide it with
reasonable assurance that it has sufficient personnel with the capabilities,
competence, and commitment to ethical principles necessary to perform its
engagements in accordance with professional standards and regulatory and legal
requirements and to enable the firm or engagement partners to issue reports that
are appropriate in the circumstances. Such policies and procedures should address
relevant HR issues including recruitment, compensation, training, career
development, performance evaluation etc. There should be emphasis on the
continuing professional development of firm's personnel.

17E. Engagement Performance

Consistency in quality of engagement performance is achieved through briefing of
engagement teams of their objectives, processes for complying with engagement
standards, processes of engagement supervision and training, methods of
reviewing performance of work, appropriate documentation of work performed.

Consultation should take place in difficult or contentious matters pertaining to an
engagement. Consultation includes discussion, at the appropriate professional
level, with individuals within or outside the firm who have specialized expertise, to
resolve a difficult or contentious matter.

A firm needing to consult externally, for example, a firm without appropriate
internal resources, may take advantage of advisory services provided by other firms
or professional and regulatory bodies.

Significant judgments made in an engagement should be reviewed by an
engagement quality control reviewer for taking an objective view before the report
is issued. The extent of the review depends on the complexity of the engagement
and the risk that the report might not be appropriate in the circumstances. The
review does not reduce the responsibilities of the engagement partner.

Engagement quality control review is mandatory for all audits of financial
statements of listed entities. In respect of other engagements, firm should devise
criteria to determine cases requiring performance of engagement quality control
review.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.30  AUDITING AND ETHICS

There might be difference of opinion within engagement team, with those
consulted and between engagement partner and engagement quality control
reviewer. The report should only be issued after resolution of such differences. In
case, recommendations of engagement quality control reviewer are not accepted
by engagement partner and matter is not resolved to reviewer's satisfaction, the
matter should be resolved by following established procedures of firm like by
consulting with another practitioner or firm, or a professional or regulatory body.

Besides, the firm should establish policies and procedures for engagement teams
to complete the assembly of final engagement files on a timely basis after the
engagement reports have been finalized. The assembly of engagement files should
be completed in not more than 60 days after date of auditor's report in case of
audit engagements and in other cases within the limits appropriate to
engagements.

Policies and procedures should be designed to maintain the confidentiality, safe
custody, integrity, accessibility and retrievability of engagement documentation.

Unless otherwise specified by law or regulation, engagement documentation is the
property of the firm. The firm may, at its discretion, make portions of, or extracts
from, engagement documentation available to clients, provided such disclosure
does not undermine the validity of the work performed, or, in the case of assurance
engagements, the independence of the firm or its personnel.

Engagement documentation has to be retained for a period of time sufficient to permit
those performing monitoring procedures to evaluate the firm's compliance with its
system of quality control, or for a longer period if required by law or regulation.

In the specific case of audit engagements, the retention period ordinarily is no
shorter than seven years from the date of the auditor's report, or, if later, the date
of the group auditor's report.

17F. Monitoring

The firm should ensure that policies and procedures relating to the system of
quality control are relevant, adequate, operating effectively and complied with in
practice. Such policies and procedures should include an ongoing consideration
and evaluation of the firm's system of quality control, including a periodic
inspection of a selection of completed engagements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.31

    18. SA 220- "QUALITY CONTROL FOR AN AUDIT
          OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS"

Based upon quality control system of firm, quality control policies pertaining to
audit engagements are decided by engagement teams. Engagement partner of a
team is responsible for quality control procedures of a particular audit engagement
in accordance with SA 220.

Therefore, SA 220 is premised on the basis that the firm is subject to SQC 1. Within
the context of the firm's system of quality control, engagement teams have a
responsibility to implement quality control procedures that are applicable to the
audit engagement and provide the firm with relevant information to enable the
functioning of that part of the firm's system of quality control relating to
independence.

As per SA 220, the objective of the auditor is to implement quality control
procedures at the engagement level that provide the auditor with reasonable
assurance that: -

(a) The audit complies with professional standards and regulatory and legal
       requirements and

(b) The auditor's report issued is appropriate in the circumstances.

SA 220 is modelled on lines of SQC 1. It describes responsibilities of engagement
partner in relation to following matters: -

(A) Leadership responsibilities for quality on audits

(B) Relevant ethical requirements

(C) Acceptance and continuance of client relationships and audit engagements

(D) Assignment of engagement teams

(E) Engagement performance

(F) Monitoring

18A. Leadership responsibilities for quality on audits

Leadership responsibility of an engagement partner is to take responsibility for the
overall quality on each audit engagement. The actions of the engagement partner

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.32  AUDITING AND ETHICS

and appropriate messages to the other members of the engagement team, in
taking responsibility for the overall quality on each audit engagement, emphasise

(a) The importance to audit quality of: -

       (i) Performing work that complies with professional standards and
               regulatory and legal requirements;

       (ii) Complying with the firm's quality control policies and procedures as
               applicable;

       (iii) Issuing auditor's reports that are appropriate in the circumstances; and

       (iv) The engagement team's ability to raise concerns without fear of
               reprisals.

(b) The fact that quality is essential in performing audit engagements.

18B. Relevant ethical requirements

The responsibilities of an engagement partner in relation to ethical requirements
in an audit engagement are as under: -

· Identifying a threat to independence regarding the audit engagement that
       safeguards may not be able to eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level.

· Reporting by engagement partner to the relevant persons within the firm to
       determine appropriate action, which may include eliminating the activity or
       interest that creates the threat, or withdrawing from the audit engagement,
       where withdrawal is legally permitted.

18C. Acceptance and Continuance of Client Relationships
      and audit Engagements

The responsibility of an engagement partner in this regard in an audit engagement
is on lines of SQC 1 which requires the firm should obtain such information as it
considers necessary in the circumstances before accepting an engagement with a
new client, when deciding whether to continue an existing engagement, and when
considering acceptance of a new engagement with an existing client.

Information like integrity of principal owners, competence of engagement team
and consideration of necessary capabilities including time and resources,
compliance with relevant ethical requirements and significant matters arisen during

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.33

current or previous audit engagement and their implications assist the engagement
partner in determining whether the conclusions reached regarding the acceptance
and continuance of client relationships and audit engagements are appropriate.

18D. Assignment of engagement teams

It should be ensured by engagement partner that the engagement team and any
auditor's experts who are not part of the engagement team, collectively have the
appropriate competence and capabilities to perform the engagement in
accordance with professional standards and regulatory and legal requirements.

18E. Engagement Performance

Engagement partner has the responsibility for direction, supervision and
performance of audit engagement in accordance with professional standards and
regulatory and legal requirements. He is responsible for auditor's report being
appropriate in circumstances. Further, review of audit documentation before issue
of audit report is his responsibility. It has to be ensured that sufficient appropriate
audit evidence has been obtained to support the conclusions reached and for
issuance of auditor's report.

Engagement partner is also responsible for ensuring undertaking appropriate
consultation on difficult or contentious matters by engagement team not only
within the team but also with others at appropriate level within or outside the firm.

For audits of financial statements of listed entities, and those other audit
engagements, if any, for which the firm has determined that an engagement quality
control review is required, the engagement partner shall:

(a) Determine that an engagement quality control reviewer has been appointed.

(b) Discuss significant matters arising during the audit engagement, including
       those identified during the engagement quality control review, with the
       engagement quality control reviewer.

(c) Not date the auditor's report until the completion of the engagement quality
       control review.

If differences of opinion arise within the engagement team, with those consulted
or, where applicable, between the engagement partner and the engagement
quality control reviewer, the engagement team shall follow the firm's policies and
procedures for dealing with and resolving differences of opinion.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.34  AUDITING AND ETHICS

18F. Monitoring

An effective system of quality control includes a monitoring process designed to
provide the firm with reasonable assurance that its policies and procedures relating
to the system of quality control are relevant, adequate, and operating effectively.
The engagement partner shall consider the results of the firm's monitoring process
as evidenced in the latest information circulated by the firm and, if applicable, other
network firms and whether deficiencies noted in that information may affect the
audit engagement.

The engagement partner should document following matters pertaining to an audit
engagement: -

(a) Issues identified with respect to compliance with relevant ethical
       requirements and how they were resolved.

(b) Conclusions on compliance with independence requirements that apply to
       the audit engagement, and any relevant discussions with the firm that
       support these conclusions.

(c) Conclusions reached regarding the acceptance and continuance of client
       relationships and audit engagements.

(d) The nature and scope of, and conclusions resulting from, consultations
       undertaken during the course of the audit engagement.

Test Your Understanding 9

CA PK Nair is offered appointment as auditor of a company engaged in providing
tourism services. While making due diligence of the proposed client, he comes to
know that there have been raids on premises of the company and residences of its
directors by National Investigation Agency (NIA) on suspicion of links with terror
outfits. It has been followed up with searches by Enforcement Directorate hunting
for illicit money trail. There is a strong suspicion of tourism services provided by
company being façade of terror funds. Should proposed offer be accepted by him?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.35

Test Your Understanding 10

CA Arpita has joined a mid-sized CA firm recently. She finds that partners remain
too busy and the firm is proposing to accept audit work in areas in which it has no
experience or capabilities. The firm is proposing to accept audit of some entities
engaged in emerging "fin-tech" sector. Such audits may be requiring extensive use
of technology and data analytics. However, the said firm has no such capabilities
and trained personnel. Discuss, whether, firm should accept such audits with
reason.

CASE STUDY

Das & Co, a firm of auditors, is offered appointment as auditor of a company, a
prospective new client. CA Sukanya, one of partners, is dealing with new client.
While meeting with officers of the company, she comes to know that Sushant, CFO
of the company, was her class mate. In fact, both of them had started CA together.
However, Sushant had left CA mid-way due to repeated failures and tried his luck
to pursue MBA (finance) from one of leading institutions.

During initial discussions, it transpires that company is going to launch new services
in the field of "weather-forecasting". Such services would be available on web site
of company and micro weather information would be available on payment of
charges. The company requests audit firm to be visibly associated with their
marketing blitz.

Assume that firm choses to accept the offer and writes to previous auditor, Walker
& Co., to advise whether there exist any professional reasons for them not to accept
the proposed offer. However, Walker & Co. do not reply to the request of Das &
Co.

During preliminary discussions, it also became known that the said company has
acquired all shares of another company. Under relevant provisions of law, financial
statements of both companies needed to be consolidated and audited. Despite
this knowledge, Das & Co. failed to advise their client regarding audit of
consolidated financial statements.

The company also offers auditors contract for providing IT services pertaining to
information system of company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.36  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Based on above, answer following questions:

1. Considering discussion about Sukanya and Sushant, which of the following
       statements seems most appropriate?
       (a) The above discussion is irrelevant in context of proposed offer.
       (b) The proposed offer should be accepted by firm. The engagement team
               may be headed by CA Sukanya for better coordination and results.
       (c) The proposed offer should be accepted by firm. The engagement team
               may be headed by a different partner of the firm.
       (d) The matter is too trivial to be reported by CA Sukanya to other partners
               of firm.

2. Keeping in view request of the company to be visibly associated with company's
       new services, identify which type of threat is being faced by audit firm.
       (a) Self-interest threat
       (b) Familiarity threat
       (c) Self-review threat
       (d) Advocacy threat

3. The previous auditors, Walker & Co., have not replied to communication of Das
       & Co. Which fundamental principle of professional ethics is not followed by
       them?
       (a) Objectivity
       (b) Professional behaviour
       (c) Professional competence and due care
       (d) Integrity

4. Das & Co. have failed to advise the company regarding audit of consolidated
       financial statements. Which fundamental principle of professional ethics is
       violated by Das & Co.?
       (a) Professional behaviour
       (b) Integrity
       (c) Objectivity

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS                           11.37

       (d) Professional competence and due care
5. Which of the following statements is most appropriate regarding providing

       offer of work of IT services by auditors to the company?
       (a) Such offer may create a self-review threat.
       (b) Such offer may create an advocacy threat.
       (c) Such offer does not constitute any threat.
       (d) Such offer may create self-review and advocacy threats.

Answer to Questions involving Case Study

1. c  2.  d  3.                                    b  4. d  5.  a

SUMMARY

 Fundamental principles of professional ethics include integrity, objectivity,
       professional competence and due care, confidentiality and professional
       behaviour.

 Independence implies that the judgement of a person is not subordinate to
       the wishes or direction of another person who might have engaged him, or
       to his own self-interest.

 There are two interlinked perspectives of independence of auditors, one,
       independence of mind and two, independence in appearance.

 Independence of the auditor has not only to exist in fact, but also appear to
       so exist to all reasonable persons.

 Threats to independence of auditors include self-interest threats, self-review
       threats, advocacy threats, familiarity threats and intimidation threats.

 Chartered Accountants have a responsibility to remain independent by taking
       into account the context in which they practice, the threats to independence
       and the safeguards available to address the threats.

 When such threats exist, the auditor should either desist from the task or
       eliminate the threat or at the very least, put in place safeguards which reduce
       the threats to an acceptable level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.38  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 Professional skepticism refers to an attitude that includes a questioning mind,
       being alert to conditions which may indicate possible misstatement due to
       error or fraud, and a critical assessment of audit evidence.

 Professional skepticism is necessary to the critical assessment of audit
       evidence. It also includes consideration of the sufficiency and
       appropriateness of audit evidence obtained in the light of the circumstances.

 Before accepting or continuing an audit engagement, it is necessary for
       auditor to establish that preconditions for an audit are present and
       confirmation that there is a common understanding between the auditor and
       management and, where appropriate, those charged with governance of the
       terms of the audit engagement. SA 210 deals with the auditor's
       responsibilities in agreeing the terms of the audit engagement with
       management.

 Preconditions for an audit may be defined as the use by management of an
       acceptable financial reporting framework in the preparation of the financial
       statements and the agreement of management and, where appropriate, those
       charged with governance to the premise on which an audit is conducted.

 The agreed terms of the audit engagement shall be recorded in an audit
       engagement letter or other suitable form of written agreement.

 The audit engagement letter is sent by the auditor to his client. It is in the
       interest of both the auditor and the client to issue an engagement letter so
       that the possibility of misunderstanding is reduced to a great extent.

 The auditor shall not agree to a change in the terms of the audit engagement
       where there is no reasonable justification for doing so.

 If the auditor is unable to agree to a change of the terms of the audit
       engagement and is not permitted by management to continue the original
       audit engagement, the auditor shall withdraw from the audit engagement
       where possible under applicable law or regulation and determine whether
       there is any obligation, either contractual or otherwise, to report the
       circumstances to other parties, such as those charged with governance,
       owners or regulators.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.39

 High audit quality is essential to maintain confidence in the independent
       assurance provided by the auditors. It is the responsibility of auditor to
       maintain high audit quality.

 SQC 1 and SA 220 both deal with quality control. Whereas SQC 1 deals with
       all engagements including audits, reviews and other assurance and related
       service engagements, SA 220 applies to audit engagements only. SQC 1
       applies to entire firm. However, SA 220 applies to a particular audit
       engagement.

 SQC 1 requires that the firm should establish a system of quality control
       designed to provide it with reasonable assurance that the firm and its
       personnel comply with professional standards and regulatory and legal
       requirements and that reports issued by the firm or engagement partners are
       appropriate in the circumstances.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQs based Questions

(1) Identify the most appropriate statement: -
       (a) SA 220 applies at the level of firm.
       (b) SQC 1 is premised on the basis that firm is subject to SA 220.
       (c) SA 220 is premised on the basis that firm is subject to SQC 1.
       (d) SA 220 applies to all engagements.

(2) Professional skepticism includes-
       (a) Overlooking unusual circumstances.
       (b) Using inappropriate assumptions in determining extent of audit
               procedures.
       (c) Over generalising when drawing conclusions from audit observations.
       (d) Being vigilant to conditions that might indicate possibilities of fraud.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.40  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(3) Which of the following is not a fundamental principle governing professional
       ethics?
       (a) Professional competence and due care
       (b) Integrity
       (c) Objectivity
       (d) Safeguards to independence

(4) Which of the following is not necessary to establish preconditions for an audit?
       (a) Acceptability of financial reporting framework.
       (b) Acknowledgment of cooperation from management in designing audit
               procedures.
       (c) Acknowledgment from management of providing access to persons
               within company.
       (d) Acknowledgment of management in understanding its responsibility for
               preparation of financial statements.

(5) Identify the most appropriate statement in context of SQC 1.
       (a) Assembly of engagement files should be completed in not more than 60
               days after date of auditor's report in case of audit engagements.
       (b) Engagement files should be completed before date of auditor's report in
               case of audit engagements.
       (c) Engagement files should be completed in not more than 60 days after
               completion of an engagement.
       (d) Engagement files should be completed on date on which audit report is
               signed in case of audit engagements.

Correct /Incorrect

State with reasons (in short) whether the following statements are
correct or incorrect:
(i) The audit engagement letter is sent by the client to auditor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS                           11.41

(ii) The Audit Engagement documentations should ordinarily be retained by the
       auditor for minimum of six years from the date of the auditor's report or the
       date of the group auditor's report, whichever is later.

Theoretical Questions

(1) Briefly outline how principles-based approach differs from rules-based
       approach to ethics.

(2) How application of professional skepticism throughout audit is helpful in
       reducing audit risk?

(3) A Chartered accountant is conducting audit of a client for last two years. Before
       proceeding to start audit for next year, he notices that there is substantial
       change in management. Besides, client has ventured into areas of business
       activity which were not present at time of accepting initial audit engagement.
       Discuss responsibility of auditor in this regard in context of SA 210.

(4) How does SQC 1 ensure that independence in engagements is not breached by
       an audit firm?

(5) An engagement partner takes overall responsibility for maintaining audit
       quality in an audit engagement in accordance with SA 220. What are his
       objectives in taking and emphasizing such responsibility?

ANSWERS/SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs based Questions

1. c  2.  d  3.                                    d  4. b  5.  a

Answers to Correct/Incorrect

(i) Incorrect: As per SA 210 "Agreeing the Terms of Audit Engagements", the
       Audit engagement letter is sent by the auditor to his client.

(ii) Incorrect: SQC 1 requires firms to establish policies and procedures for the
       retention of engagement documentation. The retention period for audit
       engagements ordinarily is no shorter than seven years from the date of the
       auditor's report, or, if later, the date of the group auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.42  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Answers to Theoretical Questions

1. Refer to topic on principles-based approach vs. rules- based approach to
       ethics.

2. Refer to topic on "Professional Skepticism".

3. Refer to heading "terms of engagement in recurring audits".

4. Refer to heading of Ethical requirements under "Elements of System of quality
       control" in SQC 1.

5. Refer to heading of "Leadership responsibilities for quality on audits" under
       SA 220.

Answers to Questions involving Test your understanding

1. Failure to reply to professional body smacks of lack of courtesy and
       professional responsibility. The principle of "Professional behaviour" is
       disregarded.

2. "Integrity" requires that a professional accountant shall not knowingly be
       associated with reports, returns, communications or other information where
       the accountant believes that the information contains a materially false or
       misleading statement; contains statements or information provided
       negligently or omits or obscures required information where such omission
       or obscurity would be misleading.

       In the given case, a false certificate is knowingly issued showing misstated
       original cost of machinery. Therefore, fundamental principle of "integrity" is
       violated.

3. When threats to independence exist, the auditor should either desist from the
       task or eliminate the threat or at the very least, put in place safeguards which
       reduce the threats to an acceptable level.

       Holding of shares involves financial interest in the company and is in nature
       of self-interest threat. He has come to hold shares due to nomination made
       by his distant relative before accepting the appointment. Considering above,
       he should take steps to eliminate the threat by selling shares immediately
       before accepting appointment. Holding of shares of the same company for

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ETHICS AND TERMS OF AUDIT ENGAGEMENTS              11.43

       which he is offered appointment as auditor constitutes threat to his
       independence.

4. Undue dependence on fees of a client constitutes a threat as there is fear of
       losing the client. Such threats are referred to as self-interest threats.

5. In this case, Chartered Accountant is already rendering accounting and book
       keeping services to an NGO. If he accepts audit, he would be involved in
       reviewing own work. Therefore, the same constitutes "self-review" threat.

6. In the given case, auditors have relied only upon management representation
       letter regarding treatment of certain tax matters under appeal by the
       company. No other audit procedures to verify management's treatment of
       such matters under appeal have been performed by auditors. It shows lack of
       "professional skepticism" on part of auditors.

7. Engagement letter includes reference to expected form and content of audit
       report. It merely states that auditor would provide opinion in this form.
       However, engagement letter also includes statement that the form and
       content of report may need to be amended in the light of audit findings.
       Therefore, if in light of audit findings, auditor needs to give a modified
       opinion, he shall do so.

8. It is necessary for management to give in writing explicitly to the auditor that
       it understands its responsibilities for preparation of financial statements in
       accordance with applicable financial reporting framework. It is a necessary
       precondition for an audit in accordance with SA 210.

       If the preconditions for an audit are not present, the auditor shall discuss the
       matter with management. Unless required by law or regulation to do so, the
       auditor shall not accept the proposed audit engagement: -

       (a) If the auditor has determined that the financial reporting framework to
               be applied in the preparation of the financial statements is
               unacceptable or

       (b) If the agreement of management is not obtained on matters relating to
               understanding of responsibility of management on preparation of
               financial statements, internal controls for preparation of financial
               statements, providing access to all information to auditor and
               unrestricted access to persons within the entity.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.44  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       Unless required by law or regulation to do so, such a refusal on the part of
       auditor is necessary as management is not willing to accept its responsibility
       for preparation of financial statements in accordance with applicable financial
       reporting framework. An audit is conducted on this basic premise according
       to SA 210. When basic premise on which audit is conducted is not fulfilled,
       refusal by auditor is necessary.

9. Integrity of principal owners has to be considered before accepting an audit
       engagement in accordance with SA 220. In this regard, SA 220 states
       requirements on lines of SQC 1. SQC 1 clearly states that in cases where there
       are indications that the client might be involved in money laundering or other
       criminal activities, appointment should not be accepted.

       In the instant case, there have been raids of NIA on suspected links with terror
       outfits which is a criminal activity. Further, raids by Enforcement Directorate
       also point towards money laundering. Therefore, proposed offer should not
       be accepted.

10. SQC 1 requires that before accepting an engagement, competence (including
       capabilities, time and resources) to perform engagement have to be
       considered.

       In the given case, the proposed engagements involve use of technology and
       data analytics. The firm has no prior experience of audits in emerging "fin-
       tech" sector. The firm does not have trained personnel to carry out these
       audits. Hence, offer for these audits should not be accepted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CASE SCENARIOS

Case Scenario 1

M/s Vishwacharya and Associates, a CA firm based in Orissa, is appointed as an
auditor of CBF Bank for the financial year 2023-24. During the course of audit, it
came to notice that CBF Bank has sanctioned an overdraft facility of ` 75 lakh to
Times Ltd. However, as per the stock statement furnished for the last quarter, the
drawing power was calculated to be ` 50 lakh. It was observed that few advances
were guaranteed by the:
(i) Central Government as part of `Make in India' initiative. However, the

       guarantee was not invoked, and the advances were overdue by 95 days.
       These advances were classified as standard assets and were regarded as NPA
       for income recognition purpose.
(ii) State Government as part of `Power Generation' initiative. However, the
       guarantee was not invoked, and the advances were overdue by 80 days. These
       advances were also classified as standard assets and were regarded as NPA
       for income recognition purpose.
Additionally, XYZ Ltd., is a borrower availing cash credit facility of ` 110 Lakh against
security of paid stocks and debtors up to 90 days. Margin stipulated was 25% of
stock and 40% for debtors. Bank has calculated drawing power based on following
information provided by XYZ Ltd.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CS.2                      AUDITING AND ETHICS

Particulars                                                  Amount (`)
Value of Stocks (as on 31.12.2023)                           130 Lakh
Value of Debtors (as on 31.12.2023)                          75 Lakh
Value of stocks (Fully damaged and included in (i) above)    7 Lakh
Value of Debtors (exceeding 90 days included in (ii) above)  10 Lakh
Value of creditors for goods                                 60 Lakh

Also, the outstanding balance in one of the Loan accounts was ` 25 Lakh and the
realisable value of the security as assessed by the bank / approved valuers was
` 2.25 Lakh. Bank identified the same as erosion in the value of security. It was
classified as doubtful category and provision was made for the doubtful assets. A
discussion also took place among the team members regarding issuance of the
audit reports after completion of the bank audit and annexure to the same such as
Long Form Audit Report, Report on compliance with SLR Requirements, Report on
Treasury Operations ­ as per RBI guidelines, Report on compliance as per Ghosh
committee recommendations and Report on adverse credit - lending ratio in the
rural areas, etc.

Based on the above, answer the following: -

1. With respect to the overdraft facility sanctioned to Times Ltd., the account
       would be termed as out of order if:

(i) The outstanding balance remains continuously in excess of ` 75 Lakh.

(ii) The outstanding balance remains continuously in excess of ` 50 Lakh.

(iii) The outstanding balance in the account is less than ` 75 Lakh but there
       are no credits or payments deposited into the account continuously for
       90 days as on balance sheet date

(iv) The outstanding balance is less than ` 50 Lakh.

Choose the correct option from below:

(a) (i), (ii) and (iii)

(b) (i), (iii) and (iv)

(c) (ii), (iii) and (iv)

(d) (iii) and (iv)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.3

2. Which of the treatment by the bank on the provisioning and income
       recognition is correct in case of bank guarantee given by the Central
       Government and State Government?

       (a) Both (i) and (ii) are correct

       (b) Only (ii) is correct

       (c) Only (i) is correct

       (d) Both (i) and (ii) are incorrect.

3. In the given case drawing power of the borrower XYZ Limited should be:

       (a) ` 86.25 Lakh

       (b) ` 76.35 Lakh

       (c) ` 96.25 Lakh

       (d) ` 85.45 Lakh

4. The Bank has identified an erosion in the value of security and made provision
       for doubtful assets. Whether the treatment by bank for the doubtful asset is
       correct?

       (a) Yes. The security should be classified under doubtful category. It may
               be either written off or fully provided by the bank.

       (b) No. The existence of such security should be ignored, and the asset
               should straight away be classified as loss asset. It may be either written
               off or fully provided by the bank.

       (c) Yes. The security should be classified under doubtful category and
               provisioning should be made as applicable for doubtful assets.

       (d) No. The existence of the security should be ignored, and the asset
               should straight away be classified as loss asset. Provisioning should be
               made for doubtful assets.

5. The Statutory Central Auditors of a bank must furnish, in addition to the main
       audit report, various other audit reports. From the options, choose the audit
       reports that M/s Vishwacharya and Associates shall furnish.

       (i) Long Form Audit Report

       (ii) Report on compliance with SLR Requirements

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         CS.4           AUDITING AND ETHICS

    (iii) Report on Treasury Operations ­ as per RBI guidelines
    (iv) Report on compliance as per Ghosh committee recommendations
    (v) Report on adverse credit - lending ratio in the rural areas.
    Choose the correct answer:
    (a) (i), (ii),(iii),(iv) and (v)
    (b) Only (i),(ii),(iii) and (iv)
    (c) Only (i),(ii) and (iii)
    (d) Only (i),(ii) and (v)

Answers

1.  (a)        2.  (c)                             3.  (a)  4.  (b)  5.  (b)

Case Scenario 2

Pluto Limited is engaged in the manufacturing and distribution of furniture. After
Covid, as the number of people working from home has gone up, this customisable
range home office furniture has gained lot of importance. They were able to
perform very well over the years and the same has been reflected in their financial
statements.

During the year 2023-24, M/s Saha and Associates was reappointed as the auditor.
The new engagement team has CA Saha (partner) and five article assistants. Given
the large volume of transactions, the partner instructed the article assistants to
review the financial statements and auditor's report from the previous year, 2022-
23, to gain a thorough understanding.

While reviewing the summary page, one of the article Kabir noticed that few points
were under discussion with the partner before finalising the audit:

The team verified the following points with respect to employee benefit expenses:

· The employee benefit expenses recorded in the books were actually incurred
       during the relevant period.

· The expenses in respect of all personnel have been accounted for.

· The expenses recognised during the period are pertaining to the current
       accounting period.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.5

It was also noted that dividend to equity shareholders for the year 2022-23, was
declared on 15.04.2023 and was recognised as liability in the year 2022-23.

Another article Krish noticed that debtors constitute a major component of the
company's financial statements. As part of audit procedure, the auditor requested
the client to obtain external confirmations from the parties. For this, a list of all the
debtors were obtained and a random sampling was performed by the auditor. The
client directly obtained the selected debtor confirmations from the customers on
time.

Krish also observed addition in the assets amounting  50 lakhs during the year
supported by sufficient audit evidence. However, upon scrutiny, it was found that
some of the invoices were not in the name of the company. Further, Cash and cash
equivalents were classified as balances with banks, cheques and drafts on hand,
cash on hand and earmarked balances with banks (e.g. unpaid dividend).

Based on above, answer the following questions: -

1. Which among the following assertions are discussed with respect to the
       employee benefit expenses?

       (i) Measurement

       (ii) Occurrence

       (iii) Cutoff

       (iv) Completeness

       Choose the correct combination from below:

       (a) (i), (ii) and (iv)

       (b) (ii), (iii) and (iv)

       (c) (i), (iii) and (iv)

       (d) (i), (ii) and (iii)

2. Whether disclosure of dividend under the liability head during the year 2022-
       23 is appropriate?

       (a) Yes. It should be recognised in the same year irrespective of the year of
               declaration as the amount of dividend belongs to year 2022-23.

       (b) No. The amount should be recognised equally between two financial
               years.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         CS.6           AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (c) No. The amount should not be recognised as a liability. It should be
               disclosed in the notes to accounts.

       (d) No. The amount should neither be recognised as liability nor disclosure
               is required in the financial statements.

3. Which assertion has been affected in the case of fixed assets?
       (a) Existence
       (b) Rights and obligation
       (c) Completeness
       (d) Measurement

4. Cash and cash equivalents were not properly classified by the client. Which
       of the following is incorrect disclosure of the same?
       (a) Balances with banks
       (b) Cheques and drafts on hand
       (c) Cash on hand
       (d) Earmarked balances with banks (e.g.: unpaid dividend)

Answers

1.  (b)        2.  (c)                             3.  (b)  4.  (d)

Case Scenario 3

Priority Limited is a large company engaged in manufacturing of terry towels
making steady profits on a year-to-year basis. PMR & Associates, statutory auditors
of the company since last two years, are in process of establishing audit strategy
for conducting statutory audit under the Companies Act, 2013 for year 2023-24.

The company has 5 branches which are audited by independent auditors appointed
under the Companies Act, 2013. It also has a wholly owned subsidiary company
which is audited by another audit firm under name of JKL & Associates. The
engagement team has noticed that company has maintained several bank accounts
and there is substantial movement in fixed deposits during the year leading to risk
of misstatement in cash and cash equivalents. The engagement team has planned
procedures regarding the same.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.7

(i) At the planning stage, engagement partner is also trying to set materiality for
       financial statements as a whole. The following information extracted from
       financial statements is given as under: -

Particulars                                        (Amount in ` crores)
Revenue                                                           100
Total Assets                                                       40
Profit before Tax                                                  8
Total Liabilities (excluding Equity)                               30

(ii) While designing a sample for verifying revenues of company as part of tests
       of details, engagement partner has determined "tolerable misstatement" for
       ` 5.00 Lakh in order to address the risk that aggregate of individual immaterial
       misstatements may cause the financial statements to be materially misstated
       and provide a margin for possible undetected misstatements. One of the
       newly joined engagement team members has little conceptual understanding
       of "tolerable misstatement" determined by engagement partner. He also has
       no idea of the effect of change in tolerable misstatement on sample size.

(iii) During course of audit, while performing tests of details, engagement team
       has come across certain misstatements in selected sample pertaining to
       verification of revenues. The team has projected misstatements to population
       of revenues. The team wants to comply with the Standards on Auditing
       strictly.

       Based on the above, answer the following: -

       1. The auditors of the company are in the process of establishing an audit
               strategy. Which of the following is not a relevant factor in establishing
               overall audit strategy in the given case scenario?

               (a) Consideration of 5 branches which are audited by independent
                       auditors

               (b) Consideration of wholly owned subsidiary company audited by
                       another audit firm

               (c) Expected time of holding AGM in accordance with provisions of
                       the Companies Act, 2013

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CS.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (d) Nature, timing and extent of planned procedures for cash and
               cash equivalents

2. For Priority limited, which benchmark would the engagement partner
       most likely to use for setting materiality for the financial statements as
       a whole?

       (a) A percentage of Revenue

       (b) A percentage of Total assets

       (c) A percentage of Profit before tax

       (d) A percentage of Total liabilities (excluding equity)

3. In the given case scenario, assume that the engagement partner has
       decided to increase tolerable misstatement to ` 10.00 Lakh while
       designing sample described. Select the correct statement.

       (a) It would lead to decrease in sample size.

       (b) It would lead to an increase in sample size.

       (c) It would have no effect on sample size.

       (d) It is not possible to draw inference on sample size due to increase
               in tolerable misstatement.

4. While performing procedures on designed sample, the engagement
       team identified certain misstatements in selected sample and projected
       these to the entire population of revenues. According to the
       requirements of the Standards on Auditing, which statement is correct
       in this regard?

       (a) Anomalous misstatement is auditor's best estimate of
               misstatement in population.

       (b) The projected misstatement plus anomalous misstatement, if any,
               is best estimate of misstatement in population.

       (c) When projected misstatement exceeds tolerable misstatement,
               sample provides a reasonable basis for conclusion about tested
               population.

       (d) When projected misstatement plus anomalous statement, if any,
               exceeds tolerable misstatement, sample provides a reasonable
               basis for conclusion about tested population.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.9

Answers

1.  (d)  2.  (c)                                   3.  (a)  4.  (b)

Case Scenario 4

Bandhu Charitable Trust is considering the appointment of MNO & Associates,
Chartered Accountants, as independent auditors of its financial statements. The
Trust is engaged in providing affordable healthcare services. It is in interest of both
auditor and client to issue an engagement letter so that the possibility of
misunderstanding is reduced to a great extent. It is, therefore, important that each
party should be clear about the nature of engagement. It should exactly specify the
scope of the work. Such an "engagement letter" is exchanged between Trust
management and auditors.

While performing audit procedures, it is noticed by auditors that bills of two
vehicles are not in name of Trust but in name of trustees. However, payment of
these vehicles was made from bank account of Trust. The said vehicles are used for
activities of Trust.

It is also noticed that the sum of ` 50.00 Lakh is reflected in Trust's financial
statements in name of Gamma Instrument and Equipment in schedule of creditors.
The said amount is outstanding since two years. The auditors sent confirmation
request to the said supplier and seek management's co-operation in this regard.
However, management of the Trust informs the auditor regarding certain dispute
going on with the supplier of equipment due to some quality issues. It is further
informed that dispute is near settlement and it would not be proper to send
confirmation request as it can affect negotiation process.

Based on the above, answer the following : -

1. As regards exchange of engagement letter between Trust management and
       auditors is concerned, which of the following statements is likely to be true?

       (a) Engagement letter is sent by MNO & Associates to Bandhu Charitable
               Trust. It includes reference to the expected form and content of report
               to be issued by them and a statement that there may be circumstances
               in which such report may differ from its expected form and content.

       (b) Engagement letter is sent by Bandhu Charitable Trust to MNO &
               Associates. It includes reference to the expected form and content of
               report to be issued by auditors. However, it does not include a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CS.10  AUDITING AND ETHICS

               statement that such report may differ from its expected form and
               content.

       (c) Engagement letter is sent by MNO & Associates to Bandhu Charitable
               Trust. It includes reference to expected form and content of report to
               be issued by them. However, it does not include a statement that such
               a report may differ from its expected form and content.

       (d) Engagement letter is sent by MNO & Associates to Bandhu Charitable
               Trust. It does not include reference to the expected form and content
               of report to be issued by them.

2. Considering the issues related to vehicles as described in the case study,
       identify the most appropriate statement.

       (a) Auditors have identified misstatement concerning "Existence" assertion
               made by Trust management.

       (b) Auditors have identified misstatement concerning "Rights and
               Obligations" assertion made by Trust management.

       (c) Auditors have identified misstatement concerning "Accuracy" assertion
               made by Trust management.

       (d) Auditors have identified misstatement concerning "Completeness"
               assertion made by Trust management.

3. What course of action should the auditor take regarding the amount payable
       to the equipment supplier when management has communicated that
       sending a confirmation request could negatively impact the negotiation
       process?

       (a) The auditor should issue adverse opinion in auditor's report.

       (b) The auditor should seek audit evidence as to the validity and
               reasonableness of the reasons for refusal and perform alternative audit
               procedures.

       (c) The auditor should withdraw from engagement as Trust management's
               refusal is a limitation on scope of independent audit.

       (d) The auditor should disclaim opinion in auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  CASE SCENARIOS                            CS.11

Answers

1.  (a)  2.  (b)                                   3.  (b)

Case Scenario 5

Dhanush, a CA student undergoing articles, is part of an engagement team
conducting audit of Test Enterprises Private Limited. The company is engaged in
business of conducting aptitude and language tests every fortnight at centres
spread all over major cities of country for Indian students desirous of applying to
foreign universities. It also sells books containing model test papers for the benefit
of students.

The company has substantial number of computers at each center to enable
seamless experience for students appearing for standardized aptitude and
language tests. The company has acquired new identifiable software involving
substantial expenditure for conducting tests during the year which is expected to
drive company's revenues in coming years. At the time of taking a test, a CD
containing software is run in each system for enabling students to take tests. Cost
of CD without software is nominal.

The revenue of the company during the year 2023-24 was ` 50 crores (` 45 crores
from fees charged from students and ` 5 crores from sale of books). Besides,
company has also received ` 10 lacs as interest on certain investments during the
year. The company has a history of profitable operations.

During the course of audit, it is noticed by Dhanush that computers form significant
chunk of PPE items in financial statements of company. The company has taken
useful life of computers consisting of desktops for 3 years. However, depreciation
charged on computers in financial statements of the company is higher than
depreciation allowable under Income tax law. It results in lower accounting income
as per books of accounts of company as compared with taxable income under
Income tax law.

During the course of audit, he notices that the cost of CDs along with software cost
is treated as an intangible asset by company. It is also part of his responsibility to
verify PPE register in accordance with audit programme. On perusing details in PPE
register, he finds that some computers have moved from one center to another
center to meet business requirements. Further, many computers were disposed of
or scrapped in earlier years. However, proper details in relation to movement and
disposal/scrapping have not been entered in PPE register. When these items were
physically verified by the management during the year, it has resulted in material

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CS.12  AUDITING AND ETHICS

discrepancies. The management has properly dealt with such discrepancies in the
books of accounts.

Based on above, answer the following questions:

1. Considering description provided in case scenario regarding accounting
       income as per books of accounts and taxable income under Income tax law,
       choose appropriate responsibility of Dhanush:

       (a) To verify deferred tax liability likely created in financial statements in
               accordance with AS 22.

       (b) To verify deferred tax asset likely created in financial statements in
               accordance with AS 22.

       (c) To verify deferred tax asset likely created in financial statements in
               accordance with AS 29.

       (d) To verify deferred tax liability likely created in financial statements in
               accordance with AS 29.

2. Keeping in view description provided in case scenario, which of the following
       statements is likely to be correct regarding accounting treatment of cost of
       CDs and software acquired by company to run tests?

       (a) The company's accounting treatment of treating the cost of CDs with
               software costs as intangible assets is not proper. It should have treated
               such costs as revenue expenditure.

       (b) The company's accounting treatment of treating cost of CDs with
               software costs as intangible assets is proper.

       (c) The company's accounting treatment of treating cost of CDs with
               software costs as intangible assets is not proper. It should have treated
               cost of CDs as PPE item and software cost as intangible asset.

       (d) The company's accounting treatment of treating cost of CDs with
               software costs as intangible assets is not proper. It should have treated
               cost of CDs as PPE item and software cost as revenue expenditure.

3. As regards discrepancies noticed in computer systems on physical verification
       by management as described in case scenario, which of the following
       statements is most appropriate?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.13

       (a) The management has properly dealt with such discrepancies. However,
               Dhanush should bring it to light of engagement partner as it may result
               in modification of auditor's opinion.

       (b) The management has properly dealt with such discrepancies. However,
               Dhanush should bring it to light of engagement partner as it entails
               specific reporting requirement for auditor under the Companies Act,
               2013.

       (c) The management has properly dealt with such discrepancies.
               Therefore, Dhanush should not do anything further.

       (d) The management has properly dealt with such discrepancies. However,
               Dhanush should bring it to light of engagement partner as it is in nature
               of misstatement which needs to be communicated and documented by
               auditor.

4. Which of the following statements meets requirements of law in respect of
       revenue from operations of the company?

       (a) Revenue from operations of ` 50 crores should be shown in Statement
               of Profit and loss.

       (b) Revenue from operations of ` 50.10 crores should be shown in
               Statement of Profit and loss. However, revenue from sale of books, fees
               charged from students and interest on investments should be disclosed
               separately in notes.

       (c) Revenue from operations of ` 50.10 crores should be shown in
               Statement of Profit and loss.

       (d) Revenue from operations of ` 50 crores should be shown in Statement
               of Profit and loss. However, revenue from sale of books and fees
               charged from students should be disclosed separately in notes.

5. The company has taken useful life of desktops to be 3 years. Such a
       requirement is _______________

       (a) prescribed under Schedule III to the Companies Act, 2013. However, a
               company can choose a useful life different from what is prescribed
               under Schedule III.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         CS.14                 AUDITING AND ETHICS

    (b) is not prescribed under the Companies Act, 2013. It depends upon
           manufacturing specifications of desktops.

    (c) prescribed under Schedule II to the Companies Act, 2013. However, a
           company can choose a useful life different from what is prescribed
           under Schedule II.

    (d) is not prescribed under the Companies Act, 2013. It needs to be arrived
           at mandatorily by a management expert.

Answers

1.  (b)  2.               (b)                      3.  (b)  4.  (d)      5.  (c)

Case Scenario 6

CDL Limited, a company dealing in FMCG goods, is having 50 branches in India.
SKC & Associates (referred to as company's auditor) are appointed as statutory
auditors of the company for year 2023-24. Further, company has also appointed
Mr. D as branch auditor for 5 of its branches.

Since Mr. D is conducting audit of only 5 branches of company, he has not arrived
at materiality level in respect of auditee branches. On the same lines, identification
and assessment of risk of material misstatement has not been performed. He is of
the view that determination of materiality and identifying & assessing risks of
material misstatement is done for financial statements of company as a whole. He
has mainly performed substantive audit procedures in respect of financial
statements of auditee branches like verification of PPE items, inventories, trade
receivables, cash, bank balances and trade payables at auditee branches and
maintained documentation of the same.

During the course of audit at two branches dealing in same kind of goods, Mr. D
has performed analytical procedures pertaining to inventories. He has arrived at
and compared inventory turnover ratio (Cost of goods sold/Average inventory)
over a period of years of two branches. The results of analytical procedures are
summarized in Table I below:

                                                   Table 1

Particulars                    Branch                    Year     Year     Year
Inventory turnover ratio           I                   2021-22  2022-23  2023-24

                                                           15       14       12

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                          CASE SCENARIOS                     CS.15

Inventory turnover ratio                           II  4  6         10

The company's auditor has also decided to use work of Mr. D with respect to
financial information of 5 branches included in financial information of the
company. During the course of audit, company's auditor has advised Mr. D by way
of email certain significant accounting, auditing and reporting requirements and
has asked him to provide representation as to compliance with them. Irritated and
surprised, Mr. D is of the view that such an email is beyond the rights of the
company's auditor.

Based on above, answer the following questions:

1. As regards audit of a branch of CDL Limited as referred to in case scenario is
       concerned, which of the following statements is most appropriate?

(a) The accounts of a branch shall be audited either by the company's
       auditor or by any other person qualified for appointment as an auditor
       of the company and appointed as such under section 139 of the
       Companies Act, 2013. In case branch accounts are audited by a person
       other than company's auditor, branch audit report is sent by branch
       auditor to company's auditor.

(b) The accounts of a branch shall only be audited by any other person
       qualified for appointment as an auditor of the company and appointed
       as such under section 139 of the Companies Act, 2013 except
       company's auditor. In such a case, branch audit report is sent by branch
       auditor to members of company.

(c) The accounts of a branch shall only be audited by any other person
       qualified for appointment as an auditor of the company and appointed
       as such under section 139 of the Companies Act, 2013 except
       company's auditor. In such a case, branch audit report is sent by branch
       auditor to company's auditor.

(d) The accounts of a branch shall be audited either by the company's
       auditor or by any other person qualified for appointment as an auditor
       of the company and appointed as such under section 139 of the
       Companies Act, 2013. In case branch accounts are audited by a person
       other than company's auditor, branch audit report is sent by branch
       auditor to members of company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CS.16  AUDITING AND ETHICS

2. After reading methodology for carrying out branch audits by Mr. D, which of
       the following statements is likely to be most appropriate?

       (a) Separate determination of materiality and identifying & assessing risk
               of material misstatement is not required in respect of each of the
               branches. He is required to perform only substantive procedures as
               described in the case scenario in respect of auditee branches and
               maintain documentation of the same.

       (b) Separate determination of materiality and identifying & assessing risk
               of material misstatement is required in respect of each of branches.
               However, documentation for these matters regarding branches is not
               required. He is required to perform substantive procedures as described
               in case scenario in respect of auditee branches and also maintain
               documentation of the same.

       (c) Separate determination of materiality and identifying & assessing risk
               of material misstatement is required along with documentation thereof
               in respect of each of branches. He is required to perform substantive
               procedures as described in case scenario in respect of auditee branches
               and also maintain documentation of the same.

       (d) Identifying & assessing risk of material misstatement is required along
               with documentation in respect of each of branches. However,
               materiality is required to be arrived at for financial statements of
               company as a whole. He is required to perform substantive procedures
               as described in case scenario in respect of auditee branches and also
               maintain documentation of the same.

3. Choose the correct statement regarding results of analytical procedures
       performed by Mr. D summarized in Table 1 in case scenario.

       (a) During the year 2023-24, inventories of Branch I have moved faster in
               comparison to Branch II.

       (b) During the year 2023-24, inventories of Branch II have moved faster in
               comparison to Branch I.

       (c) Comparison of inventory turnover ratio of Branch II over a period of
               years may indicate that branch's sales have likely been weak with higher
               inventory holdings in year 2023-24 as compared to previous years.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.17

       (d) Comparison of inventory turnover ratio of Branch I over a period of
               years may indicate that branch's sales have likely been strong with lower
               inventory holdings in year 2023-24 as compared to previous years.

4. Considering the contents of email sent by company's auditor to Mr. D, which
       of the following statements is likely to be in accordance with Standards on
       Auditing?

       (a) Company's auditor can advise Mr. D regarding certain significant
               accounting, auditing and reporting requirements and ask him to
               provide representation as to compliance with them.

       (b) Company's auditor can advise Mr. D certain significant accounting,
               auditing and reporting requirements. However, asking him to provide
               representation as to compliance with them is breach of Mr. D's
               independence.

       (c) Company's auditor cannot advise Mr. D certain significant accounting,
               auditing and reporting requirements. It is breach of Mr. D's
               independence.

       (d) Company's auditor can advise Mr. D regarding certain significant
               accounting, auditing and reporting requirements only when Mr. D
               makes such a request.

Answers

1.  (a)  2.  (c)                                   3.  (a)  4.  (a)

Case Scenario 7

CA B is conducting statutory audit of branch of a nationalized bank. Saurabh, a CA
student, is also part of the engagement team conducting statutory branch audit.
The field of bank branch audit is new to him, and he is following instructions as
required by engagement partner.

The engagement partner has asked him to prepare a summary of non-funded credit
facilities outstanding as on balance sheet date. The following information is
appearing in branch's CBS data/records as on 31st March, 2024:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    CS.18                 AUDITING AND ETHICS

S.No, Particulars in CBS (Core Banking solution)/records      Amount in `
                                                                       crores
1.  Agricultural term loans                                             15.00
                                                                          3.50
2.  Staff housing loans                                                   0.20
                                                                        10.00
3.  Staff vehicle loans                                                   2.50
                                                                          1.50
4.  Housing loans-General public                                          1.00
                                                                          2.00
5.  Letters of credit issued                                              0.10

6.  Education loans

7.  Guarantees issued (Fully secured by 100% margin)

8.  Bills purchased and discounted

9.  Bills for collection

On going through listing of housing loans to public, CA B notices that branch has
sanctioned many housing loans of small ticket size ranging between
` 10.00 to ` 20 lakhs. Therefore, he has assessed the risk of material misstatements
to be high. As a consequence, he has designed procedures to perform tests of
controls as well as substantive tests.

Saurabh has been further asked to go through SMA (Special Mention Accounts)
jotting as on 30th November, 2023. Such reports are available from the system

monthly frequency. Being new to such type of assignment, he is unable to

understand relevance of above audit procedure mandated by engagement partner.

Based on above, answer the following questions:

1. Considering table given in the case scenario, which of the following
       combinations is appropriate example of non- funded credit facilities provided
       by branch to its customers?

    (a) Bills purchased and discounted; bills for collection

    (b) Bills for collection; staff housing loans; letters of credit issued

    (c) Bills purchased and discounted; letters of credit issued; guarantees
           issued (fully secured by 100% margin)

    (d) Letters of credit issued, guarantees issued (fully secured by 100%
           margin)

2. CA B's decision to perform both tests of controls as well as substantive tests
       was taken after he had assessed the risk of material misstatement in financial

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  CASE SCENARIOS                            CS.19

       statements to be high due to large number of small ticket size loans. Which
       Standard on Auditing deals with auditor's responsibility to design such tests?

       (a) SA 500

       (b) SA 330

       (c) SA 300

       (d) SA 315

3. Saurabh is unable to understand relevance of going through SMA jotting as
       on 30th November, 2023. Which of the following statements is most
       appropriate in this context?

       (a) It would necessarily help the auditor in identifying accounts with
               significant lending exposure.

       (b) It would help the auditor in identifying accounts which may involve
               downgrading from Sub-standard asset category to doubtful category.

       (c) It would help the auditor in identifying accounts where substantial
               recoveries have been received during the year.

       (d) It would help the auditor in identifying accounts which may involve
               downgrading from standard category to non-performing asset.

Answers

1.  (d)  2.  (b)                                   3.  (d)

Case Scenario 8

Watch IT India Private Limited is a company engaged in business of manufacturing
smart watches. The company had a slow start in the beginning as the company's
products were gaining traction with customers. However, momentum has picked
up during the year. The company wants to appoint M/s Tripati & Associates, a CA
firm, as their auditor for year 2023-24 by replacing their existing auditors M/s
Sreepath and Co. M/s Tripati & Associates are willing to accept the engagement.
They communicated with previous auditors before accepting the engagement.
However, M/s Sreepath and Co. have failed to respond.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CS.20  AUDITING AND ETHICS

CA Kishan, partner of M/s Tripati & Associates explained to his team members
about the importance of Engagement letter. He also arranged a team discussion
on matters relating to acceptance of terms of engagement.

The first point of consideration was concerning preconditions for an audit. Mr.
Arun, a team member, could recollect a few of them. Those included determining
whether financial reporting framework used in the preparation of financial
statement is acceptable, management providing auditor with access to all relevant
information and additional information upon auditor's request. It was further
elaborated by Arun that management must provide unrestricted access to
employees within entity as may be required by auditor for obtaining audit evidence.
Team members were asked to list factors that may necessitate revision of
Engagement letter in case of recurring audits. Mr. Kumar, another team member
replied that revision may be required in cases involving significant change in
ownership, recent changes in senior management, change in financial reporting
framework adopted in preparation of financial Statements, modest change in
nature or size of the entity's business, change in legal and regulatory requirements
etc.

Mr. Ram, one of the team members, raised a doubt. He enquired regarding recourse
available to incoming auditor in case management makes it clear before acceptance
of engagement by auditor regarding its inability in providing support to him in
respect of certain procedures expected to be performed during course of audit. In
this respect, specific question was raised relating to sending of confirmation
requests to material trade payables reflecting in financial statements of a company.
Trade payables pertain to material input and input services acquired and utilised
by company during the year. Lack of support by management in such a case would,
in effect, signify management's refusal to allow auditor to send confirmation
requests at the outset before engagement is accepted by auditor.

Based on above, answer the following questions:

1. As regards the doubt of Mr. Ram described in the last para of case scenario,
       which of the following statements is likely to be in accordance with Standards
       on Auditing?

       (a) The auditor needs to inquire into management's reasons for the refusal
               and perform alternative audit procedures to obtain relevant and reliable
               audit evidence.

       (b) The auditor needs to evaluate implications of management's refusal on
               auditor's assessment of risk of material misstatement and perform

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.21

               alternative audit procedures to obtain relevant and reliable audit
               evidence.
               (c) The auditor should not accept such an engagement.
               (d) The auditor needs to evaluate implications of management's

                       refusal on risk of fraud and perform alternative audit procedures
                       to obtain relevant and reliable audit evidence.

2. When CA Kishan, the partner, asked about preconditions for an audit,
       Mr. Arun could recollect only few of them. Read the passage and find out
       which among the following points were missed.

       (i) Obtaining management responsibility on specific legal aspects
               governing the organisation.

       (ii) Obtaining management responsibility on Standards on Auditing
               applicable to the organisation.

       (iii) Obtaining management responsibility for the preparation of financial
               statements as per applicable financial reporting framework.

       (iv) Obtaining management responsibility on necessary Internal controls to
               enable preparation of financial statements which are free from material
               misstatement whether due to error or fraud.

       Choose the correct answer from below options.

       (a) (i), (ii) and (iii)

       (b) (ii), (iii) and (iv)

       (c) (iii) and (iv)

       (d) (i) and (iv)

3. From what Mr. Kumar replied about the factors requiring a revision of
       Engagement letter one point was incorrect. Read the passage and find that
       incorrect factor.

       (a) A significant change in ownership

       (b) A recent change in management

       (c) A change in financial reporting framework adopted in preparation of
               Financial Statements

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         CS.22       AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (d) A modest change in nature or size of the entity's business

4. M/s Sreepath & Co. have failed to respond to incoming auditors. In this
       regard, choose the most appropriate option: -

       (a) It was unethical on part of outgoing auditors for failing to respond to
               communication made by incoming auditors. It is violation of principle
               of objectivity governing professional ethics.

       (b) It was ethical on part of outgoing auditors for failing to respond to
               communication made by incoming auditors. It does not involve
               violation of any of fundamental principles governing professional
               ethics.

       (c) It was unethical on part of outgoing auditors for failing to respond to
               communication made by incoming auditors. It is violation of principle
               of Professional competence and due care governing professional ethics.

       (d) It was unethical on part of outgoing auditors for failing to respond to
               communication made by incoming auditors. It is violation of principle
               of professional behaviour governing professional ethics.

Answers

1.  (c)  2.     (c)                                3.  (d)  4.  (d)

Case Scenario 9

In accordance with the requirements of Standards on Auditing, CA Tina (a freshly
qualified professional) wants to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence in an
audit engagement pertaining to financial statements of a partnership firm for the
year 2023-24. The firm trades in FMCG goods. Appointed in May, 2024, she needs
evidence to obtain information for arriving at her judgment. Clearly remembering
fundamentals that an auditor must obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to
draw reasonable conclusions on financial statements, she proceeded in accordance
with audit plan prepared by her.

During the year 2023-24, the firm was maintaining a current account with a branch
of a public sector bank. Her audit plan had included procedure of confirming
balance of current account directly from bank. As at 28th March, 2024, the firm had
an urgent need to pay its utility bill amounting to ` 1.00 lacs. However, due to
insufficiency of funds, it had requested branch manager to get cheque drawn on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CASE SCENARIOS                                     CS.23

utility company cleared. Therefore, balance in current account of firm in books of
bank branch stood at ` 0.92 lacs (Debit). The firm had also issued cheques in
evening of 31st March,2024 in anticipation of funds on next working day i.e. 3rd
April, 2024. It had also certain cheques dated 27th March, 2024 from its debtors
lying with it which were deposited in afternoon of 31st March,2024 in bank branch
at request of debtors.

Her plan also included performance of certain procedures pertaining to verification
of inventories. Inventories of FMCG goods were material to financial statements.
Her assistant, Tisha, had her own notion about understanding sufficient appropriate
audit evidence. She further feels that when audit evidence is obtained from
available records of an entity, it is known as internal evidence like purchase bills of
FMCG goods, debit notes issued by firm on debtors for GST short charged earlier
during the year and credit notes issued by firm during the year on debtors to
account for extra price charged in accordance with provisions of GST law. She is
also of the view that audit evidence obtained by auditor is final and conclusive.

Based upon above, answer the following questions: -

1. As regards matter of balance in current account and related issues is
       concerned, which of the following statements is likely to be most
       appropriate?

       (a) Amount of ` 0.92 lac is required to be classified under cash & bank
               balances in financial statements of firm. Procedure of confirming
               balance directly from the bank alone is likely to constitute sufficient
               appropriate audit evidence.

       (b) Amount of ` 0.92 lac is required to be classified under cash & bank
               balances in financial statements of firm. The procedure of confirming
               balance directly from the bank alone is not likely to constitute sufficient
               appropriate audit evidence.

       (c) Amount of ` 0.92 lac is required to be classified under current liabilities
               in financial statements of firm. The procedure of confirming balance
               directly from the bank alone is likely to constitute sufficient appropriate
               audit evidence.

       (d) Amount of ` 0.92 lac is required to be classified under current liabilities
               in financial statements of firm. Procedure of confirming balance directly
               from the bank alone is not likely to constitute sufficient appropriate
               audit evidence.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CS.24  AUDITING AND ETHICS

2. Considering matter of verification of inventories, which of the following
       statements is based on facts described in the situation and also in essence of
       Standards on Auditing?

       (a) She should verify subsequent sale invoices of inventory items lying in
               stocks as at year end. Besides, she should also review stock records of
               the year 2023-24 and subsequent period. Such evidence may constitute
               sufficient appropriate audit evidence.

       (b) She should verify subsequent sale invoices of inventory items lying in
               stocks as at year end. Besides, she should also review stock records of
               year 2023-24 and subsequent period. She should attend physical
               inventory count at year end in above situation. Such evidence may
               constitute sufficient appropriate audit evidence.

       (c) She should verify purchase invoices of inventory items lying in stocks
               as at year end. Stock records are not required to be verified. Such
               evidence is likely to constitute sufficient appropriate audit evidence.

       (d) She should verify purchase invoices of inventory items lying in stocks
               as at year end. She should attend physical inventory count at year end
               in above situation Such evidence may constitute sufficient appropriate
               audit evidence.

3. Identify correct statement on the basis of description provided in case
       scenario: -

       (a) Purchase bills of FMCG goods, debit notes issued by firm on debtors
               for GST short charged earlier during the year and credit notes issued by
               firm during the year on debtors to account for extra price charged in
               accordance with provisions of GST law are all examples of internal
               evidence. Audit evidence obtained by auditor is final and conclusive.

       (b) Purchase bills of FMCG goods, debit notes issued by firm on debtors
               for GST short charged earlier during the year and credit notes issued by
               firm during the year on debtors to account for extra price charged in
               accordance with provisions of GST law are all examples of internal
               evidence. Audit evidence obtained by auditor is persuasive.

       (c) Only debit notes issued by firm on debtors for GST short charged earlier
               during the year and credit notes issued by firm during the year on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  CASE SCENARIOS                            CS.25

           debtors to account for extra price charged in accordance with
           provisions of GST law are examples of internal evidence. Audit evidence
           obtained by auditor is persuasive.

    (d) Only debit notes issued by firm on debtors for GST short charged earlier
           during the year is an example of internal evidence. Audit evidence
           obtained by auditor is persuasive.

Answers

1.  (d)  2.  (a)                                   3.  (c)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
