    CHAPTER  3

    RISK ASSESSMENT
    AND INTERNAL
    CONTROL

                                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

..  After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand-

     Meaning of audit risk and variables affecting it.

     Risk assessment procedures.

     Concept of materiality in planning and performing an audit.
     Importance of understanding the entity and its environment.
     Meaning, objectives, benefits and limitations of internal control.

     Components of internal control.

     Whether all the controls are relevant to an audit.

     Nature and Extent of the Understanding of Relevant Controls.

     Risks that require special audit consideration.

     Evaluation of Internal control system-Benefits and methods.

     Testing of internal control.
     Automated environments-its key features.
     Risks arising from use of IT Systems.
     Types of Controls in an automated environment.

     Importance of data analytics for audit.

     Internal financial controls as per regulatory requirements.

     Auditor's responses to assessed risks.

     Practicality of above concepts by studying through examples and case studies.

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.2                AUDITING AND ETHICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

Understanding the      Audit Risk                               Identify & Assess
   Entity and its                                                Risk of Material
    Environment    Risk Assessment                                Misstatement
                             &

                   Internal Control

                   Risk Assessment
                      Procedures

                                                   Automated
                                                   Environment

                   SA - 315, SA                                 IT Related
                       320 &                                       Risks
                      SA 330

       Data                  DIGITAL                            Controls &
     Analytics                AUDIT                             Types of IT

                                                                 Controls

                    Testing                                     Impact on
                   Methods                                       Controls

                                                   Internal
                                                   Financial
                                                   Controls

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.3

Sameer had now subscribed to online subscription of a pink newspaper using his
android phone. He was getting regular news updates pertaining to financial matters
of companies. While going through such updates, he stumbled upon one report
relating to audited accounts of a listed company. Scrolling the same, he gathered
that SEBI had referred the matter to regulator for further action.

He was flummoxed. He had learnt that audit is carried out after proper planning
and performing audit procedures. However, the news report was hinting at
possibility of inappropriate opinion expressed by the auditor. Was it a single odd
case? Or is there a chance of inappropriate opinion being expressed by an auditor
when there are significant wrong doings in financial statements in every audit?
What is this risk known as? What causes presence of this risk? Can't it be eliminated
completely? How this risk can be addressed? He needed answers to such
questions.

It was clear to him that a meaningful and effective audit is possible only after
gaining knowledge about client's business. What are the specifics about it? It
cannot be limited merely to understanding about nature of client's business. Apart
from this, it must include a study and evaluation of client's systems and controls.
What system has been devised and put into operation by the client to carry out its
business efficiently and effectively? How the client is ensuring reliability of financial
reporting? All these questions should be important to an auditor.

Whether gaining knowledge of client's systems and controls is enough? Shouldn't
it be followed up with actual testing of client's controls? It is only when controls
are actually tested, these can be relied upon. A thought was gaining in his mind
how auditor responds to the risks. Is testing of controls enough or something more
to be done?

He already knew how actively business entities are using technology to develop
their systems with minimal human intervention. Shouldn't use of technology ease
up the things? Can use of technology also involve risks which may be relevant to
an auditor so that he doesn't give an inappropriate opinion? To satiate his mind,
he turned to Chapter 3.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.4  AUDITING AND ETHICS

     1. AUDIT RISK

Audit risk means the risk that the auditor gives an inappropriate audit opinion when
the financial statements are materially misstated.

It means that an auditor expresses an unmodified opinion when financial
statements are materially misstated. In such a case, not only reputation of auditor
would be damaged, but he could also invite regulatory action from professional
body and could face probable legal action by intended users.

To avoid such unpleasant consequences, the auditor will plan and perform the audit
in such a way that audit risk is reduced to an acceptably low level. SA-200 states
that the auditor shall obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to reduce audit
risk to an acceptably low level and thereby enable the auditor to draw reasonable
conclusions on which to base the auditor's opinion.

Consider, for example, that profits of a company have been increased artificially by
showing fake revenues of sizeable amounts in its financial statements. In such a
case, financial statements are materially misstated. The probability, that auditor in
such a case, expresses an inappropriate audit opinion is referred to as audit risk. It
is the possibility that auditor expresses an unmodified opinion even when
financial statements are materially misstated.

Audit risk is a function of the risks of material misstatement and detection risk.

1.1 Risks of material misstatement

SA 200 states that risk of material statement is the risk that the financial statements
are materially misstated prior to audit. It simply means that there is a probability
of frauds or errors in financial statements before audit.

What is meant by misstatement?

Misstatement refers to a difference between the amount, classification,
presentation, or disclosure of a reported financial statement item and the amount,
classification, presentation, or disclosure that is required for the item to be in
accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework. Misstatements can
arise from error or fraud.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.5

Few examples of misstatements could be: -

 Charging of an item of capital expenditure to revenue or vice-versa
 Difference in disclosure of a financial statement item vis-à-vis its requirement in

       applicable financial reporting framework
 Selection or application of inappropriate accounting policies

 Difference in accounting estimate of a financial statement item vis-à-vis its
       appropriateness in applicable financial reporting framework

 Intentional booking of fake expenses in statement of profit and loss

 Overstating of receivables in financial statements by not writing off irrecoverable
       debts

 Overstating or understating inventories

The risks of material misstatement may exist at two levels: -

(i) The overall financial statement level

(ii) The assertion level for classes of transactions, account balances, and
       disclosures.

Risks of material misstatement at the overall financial statement level refer to
risks of material misstatement that relate pervasively to the financial statements as
a whole and potentially affect many assertions.

Risks of material misstatement at the assertion level are assessed in order to
determine the nature, timing, and extent of further audit procedures necessary to
obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence. This evidence enables the auditor to
express an opinion on the financial statements at an acceptably low level of audit
risk.

1.2 Components of risk of material misstatement

The risk of material misstatement at assertion level comprises of two
components i.e., inherent risk and control risk. Both inherent risk and control
risk are the entity's risks and they exist independently of the audit of financial
statements. Inherent risk and control risk are influenced by the client. These are
entity's risks and are not influenced by the auditor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.6  AUDITING AND ETHICS

1.2A Inherent risk

Inherent risk is the susceptibility of an assertion about a class of transaction,
account balance or disclosure to a misstatement that could be material, either
individually or when aggregated with other misstatements before consideration of
any related controls as described in SA-200.

There is always a risk that before considering any existence of internal control in an
entity, a particular transaction, balance of an account or a disclosure required to be
made in the financial statements of an entity have a chance of being misstated and
such misstatement can be material. This risk is known as inherent risk.

Inherent risk is higher for some assertions and related classes of transactions,
account balances, and disclosures than for others. For example, it may be higher
for complex calculations.

Inherent risk factors are considered while designing tests of controls and
substantive procedures. Category of auditor's assessment lower or higher, each
category covers a range of degrees of inherent risk. Auditor may assess the inherent
risk of two different assertions as lower while recognizing that one assertion has
less inherent risk than the other, although both have been assessed as lower.

It is important to consider the reason for each identified inherent risk even if the
risk is lower, when auditor designs tests of controls and substantive procedures.

External circumstances giving rise to business risks may also influence inherent risk.
For example, technological developments might make a particular product
obsolete. Factors in the entity and its environment may also influence the inherent
risk related to a specific assertion.

Few examples of inherent risks could include: -

 An accounting standard provides guidance on some complex issue which
       might not be understood by the management. Therefore, recording of this
       issue in financial statements carries inherent risk of being misstated.

 There are large number of business failures in an industry. Therefore,
       assertions in financial statements of an entity operating in such an industry
       carry an inherent risk of being misstated.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.7

1.2B Control risk

In accordance with SA-200, control risk is the risk that a misstatement that could
occur in an assertion about a class of transaction, account balance or disclosure
and that could be material, either individually or when aggregated with other
misstatements, will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis
by the entity's internal control.

Control risk is a risk that internal control existing and operating in an entity would
not be efficient enough to stop from happening, or find and then rectify in an
appropriate time, any material misstatement relating to a transaction, balance of
an account or disclosure required to be made in the financial statements of that
entity. Therefore, in a way, it can be said that there exists an inverse relation
between control risk and efficiency of internal control of an entity. When efficiency
of internal control of an entity is high, the control risk is low and when efficiency of
internal control of that entity is low, the control risk is high.

Examples of control risk could include: -

 A company has devised control that cash and cheque books should be kept
       in a locked safe and access is granted to authorized personnel only. There is
       risk that control is not being followed.

 An entity has devised a control that fire extinguishers and smoke detectors
       are in place and are in working condition at all times to reduce the risk of
       damage to inventories caused by fire. There is a risk that fire extinguishers in
       place are expired and are not being refilled. Similarly, there is a possibility
       that smoke detectors are not working.

 A company has devised a control relating to petty cash that items of
       expenditure of only less than ` 10000 should be routed through imprest
       system of petty cash. There is a risk that control is not being followed.

1.3 Detection risk

SA 200 defines detection risk as the risk that the procedures performed by the
auditor to reduce audit risk to an acceptably low level will not detect a
misstatement that exists and that could be material, either individually or when
aggregated with other misstatements.

For example, auditor of a company uses certain audit procedures for the purpose

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

of obtaining audit evidence and reducing audit risk, but still there will remain a risk
that audit procedures used by the auditor may not be able to detect a misstatement
which by nature is material, then that risk is known as detection Risk.

Detection risk comprises sampling and non-sampling risk.

 Sampling risk is the risk that the auditor's conclusion based on a sample may
       be different from the conclusion if the entire population were subjected to the
       same audit procedure. It simply means that the sample was not representative
       of the population from which it was chosen.

 Non-sampling risk is the risk that the auditor reaches an erroneous conclusion
       for any reason not related to sampling risk. Like an auditor may reach an
       erroneous conclusion due to application to some inappropriate audit procedure.

Examples of detection risk could include: -

 Sizeable work-in-progress inventories are expected in financial statements of a
       company. However, auditor of the company does not devote time to attending
       inventory count. Instead, he chooses to rely upon alternative audit procedures.

 The auditor of a company has audited revenue of a company by taking a
       sample. However, there is a risk that sample of revenue is not representative
       of overall revenue.

The auditor can only influence detection risk. Inherent risk and control risk belong
to the entity and are influenced by the entity. Therefore, auditor must reduce
detection risk in order to keep audit risk at low level. Detection risk may be
reduced by increasing area of checking, testing larger samples and by
including competent and experienced persons in the engagement team.

1.4 Audit risk-What is not included?

Audit risk is a technical term related to the process of auditing; it does not refer to
the auditor's business risks such as loss from litigation, adverse publicity, or other
events arising in connection with the audit of financial statements.

For purposes of the SAs, audit risk does not include the risk that the auditor might
express an opinion that the financial statements are materially misstated when they
are not. This risk is ordinarily insignificant.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL                              3.9

1.5 Assessment of risks- A matter of professional
      Judgment

As discussed at the outset, audit risk is a function of the risks of material
misstatement and detection risk. The assessment of risks is based on audit
procedures to obtain information necessary for that purpose and evidence
obtained throughout the audit. The assessment of risks is a matter of professional
judgment, rather than a matter capable of precise measurement. The distinguishing
feature of the professional judgment expected of an auditor is that it is exercised
by an auditor whose training, knowledge and experience have assisted in
developing the necessary competencies to achieve reasonable judgments.

An Overview of Audit risk

Checkbox Audit risk- What is included?

   Audit risk is the risk that the auditor gives an inappropriate audit

   opinion when the financial statements are materially misstated.

   A function of risks of material misstatement and detection risk.

X  Auditor's business risks such as loss from litigation, adverse publicity, or

   other events arising in connection with the audit of financial statements.

X  Risk that the auditor might express an opinion that the financial

   statements are materially misstated when they are not.

                                                   Audit risk

   Risks of material                                           Detection risk
     misstatement

Inherent risk  Control risk                        Sampling risk  Non-Sampling
                                                                         risk

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.10  AUDITING AND ETHICS

1.5.1 Combined Assessment of the Risk of Material Misstatement

Standards on auditing do not ordinarily refer to inherent risk and control risk
separately, but rather to a combined assessment of the "risks of material
misstatement". However, the auditor may make separate or combined assessments
of inherent and control risk depending on preferred audit techniques or
methodologies and practical considerations. The assessment of the risks of material
misstatement may expressed in quantitative terms, such as in percentages, or in
non-quantitative terms. In any case, the need for the auditor to make appropriate
risk assessments is more important than the different approaches by which they
may be made.

It can be concluded from the above that: -

                 Audit risk = Risks of material misstatement X Detection risk

Since risks of material misstatement is a function of inherent risk and control risk,
it can also be shown as: -

                    Audit risk = Inherent risk X Control risk X Detection risk

ILLUSTRATION 1

XYZ Ltd is engaged in the business and running several stores dealing in variety of
items such as ready made garments for all seasons, shoes, gift items, watches etc. There
are security tags on each and every item. Moreover, inventory records are physically
verified on monthly basis.

Discuss the types of inherent, control and detection risks as perceived by the auditor.

SOLUTION

Inherent Risk: Because items may have been misappropriated by employees,
therefore, risk to the auditor is that inventory records would be inaccurate.

Control Risk: There is a security tag on each item displayed. Moreover, inventory
records are physically verified on monthly basis. Despite various controls being
implemented at the stores, still collusion among employees may be there and risk
to auditor would again be that inventory records would be inaccurate.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.11

Detection Risk: Auditor checks the efficiency and effectiveness of various control
systems in place. He would do that by making observation, inspection, enquiry, etc.
In addition to these, the auditor would also employ sampling techniques to check
few sales transactions from beginning to end. However, despite all these
procedures, the auditor may not detect the items which have been stolen or
misappropriated.

ILLUSTRATION 2

A Partnership Firm of Chartered Accountants HT and Associates was appointed to
audit the books of accounts of Wind and Ice Limited for the financial year 2020-21.
There was a risk that HT and Associates would give an inappropriate audit opinion if
the financial statements of Wind and Ice Limited are materially misstated. State the
Risk mentioned in the question

SOLUTION

The risk mentioned in the question is known as Audit Risk, because risk that auditor
of a company will give an inappropriate audit opinion if the financial statements of
that company are materially misstated is known as Audit Risk.

Test Your Understanding 1

Wear & Tear Private Limited is a "start-up" engaged in providing holistic solutions
to problem of paddy stubble burning mainly catering to needs of farmers of North
western India. Due to importance given by governments to this issue, companies
have entered in the market in past few years. Many of these companies have not
been successful and have gone bust. As an auditor of the company, can you spot
the component of risks of material misstatement involved in above?

Test Your Understanding 2

A company has devised a control that its inventory of perishable goods is stored in
appropriate conditions- in a controlled environment to prevent any damages to
inventory. Responsibility is fixed on two persons to monitor environment using
sensors and to report on deviations. Identify the component of risks of material
misstatement involved as an auditor of the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.12  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Test Your Understanding 3

Shree Foods Private Limited is engaged in manufacturing of garlic bread. The
auditors of company have planned audit procedures in respect of recognition of
revenues of the company. Despite that, there is a possibility that misstatements in
revenue recognition are not identified by planned audit procedures. Which risk is
being alluded to?

1.6 Identifying and assessing the risk of material
      misstatement

As per SA 315 "Identifying and Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatement
through Understanding the Entity and its Environment", the objective of the
auditor is to identify and assess the risks of material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error, at the financial statement and assertion levels, through
understanding the entity and its environment, including the entity's internal
control, thereby providing a basis for designing and implementing responses to
the assessed risks of material misstatement. This will help the auditor to reduce the
risk of material misstatement to an acceptably low level.

The objective of the auditor as stated in SA 315 is to identify and assess the risks
of material misstatement.

(i) The auditor shall identify and assess the risks of material misstatement at:

       (a) the financial statement level

       (b) the assertion level for classes of transactions, account balances, and
               disclosures

       to provide a basis for designing and performing further audit procedures

(ii) For the purpose of identifying and assessing the risks of material
       misstatement, the auditor shall: -

       (a) Identify risks throughout the process of obtaining an understanding of
               the entity and its environment, including relevant controls that relate to
               the risks, and by considering the classes of transactions, account
               balances, and disclosures in the financial statements

       (b) Assess the identified risks, and evaluate whether they relate more
               pervasively to the financial statements as a whole and potentially affect
               many assertions

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.13

       (c) Relate the identified risks to what can go wrong at the assertion level,
               taking account of relevant controls that the auditor intends to test and

       (d) Consider the likelihood of misstatement, including the possibility of
               multiple misstatements, and whether the potential misstatement is of a
               magnitude that could result in a material misstatement.

1.7 Risk Assessment Procedures

You have already gained a little knowledge about risk assessment procedures in
Chapter 2.

The audit procedures performed to obtain an understanding of the entity and its
environment, including the entity's internal control, to identify and assess the risks
of material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, at the financial statement
and assertion level are defined as risk assessment procedures.

Risk assessment procedures are a basis for the identification and assessment of
risks of material misstatement at the financial statement and assertion levels The
auditor shall perform risk assessment procedures to provide a basis for the
identification and assessment of risks of material misstatement at the financial
statement and assertion levels. Risk assessment procedures by themselves,
however, do not provide sufficient appropriate audit evidence on which to base the
audit opinion.

The risks to be assessed include both those due to error and those due to
fraud.

What is included in risk assessment procedures?

The risk assessment procedures shall include the following:

(a) Inquiries of management and of others within the entity who in the auditor's
       judgment may have information that is likely to assist in identifying risks of
       material misstatement due to fraud or error.

(b) Analytical procedures.

(c) Observation and inspection.

(a) Inquiries of Management and Others Within the Entity: Much of the
       information obtained by the auditor's inquiries is obtained from management
       and those responsible for financial reporting. However, the auditor may also

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.14  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       obtain information, or a different perspective in identifying risks of material
       misstatement, through inquiries of others within the entity and other
       employees with different levels of authority.

        Inquiries directed toward internal audit personnel may provide
               information about internal audit procedures performed during the year
               relating to the design and effectiveness of the entity's internal control
               and whether management has satisfactorily responded to findings from
               those procedures.

        Inquiries of employees involved in initiating, processing or recording
               complex or unusual transactions may help the auditor to evaluate the
               appropriateness of the selection and application of certain accounting
               policies.

        Inquiries directed toward in-house legal counsel may provide
               information about such matters as litigation, compliance with laws and
               regulations, knowledge of fraud or suspected fraud affecting the entity,
               warranties, post-sales obligations, arrangements (such as joint
               ventures) with business partners and the meaning of contract

        Inquiries directed towards marketing or sales personnel may provide
               information about changes in the entity's marketing strategies, sales
               trends, or contractual arrangements with its customers.

        Inquiries directed to the risk management function (or those
               performing such roles) may provide information about operational and
               regulatory risks that may affect financial reporting.

        Inquiries directed to information systems personnel may provide
               information about system changes, system or control failures, or other
               information system- related risks.

(b) Analytical Procedures: Analytical procedures performed as risk assessment
       procedures may identify aspects of the entity of which the auditor was
       unaware and may assist in assessing the risks of material misstatement in
       order to provide a basis for designing and implementing responses to the
       assessed risks. Analytical procedures performed as risk assessment
       procedures may include both financial and non-financial information, for

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.15

       example, relationship between sales and square footage of selling space or
       volume of goods sold.

       Analytical procedures may help identify the existence of unusual transactions
       or events, and amounts, ratios, and trends that might indicate matters that
       have audit implications. Unusual or unexpected relationships that are
       identified may assist the auditor in identifying risks of material misstatement,
       especially risks of material misstatement due to fraud. However, when such
       analytical procedures use data aggregated at a high level (which may be the
       situation with analytical procedures performed as risk assessment
       procedures), the results of those analytical procedures only provide a broad
       initial indication about whether a material misstatement may exist.
       Accordingly, in such cases, consideration of other information that has been
       gathered when identifying the risks of material misstatement together with
       the results of such analytical procedures may assist the auditor in
       understanding and evaluating the results of the analytical procedures.

(c) Observation and Inspection: Observation and inspection may support
       inquiries of management and others, and may also provide information about
       the entity and its environment. Examples of such audit procedures include
       observation or inspection of the following:

        The entity's operations.

        Documents (such as business plans and strategies), records, and internal
               control manuals.

        Reports prepared by management (such as quarterly management reports
               and interim financial statements) and those charged with governance
               (such as minutes of board of director's meetings)

        The entity's premises and plant facilities.

1.8 Information obtained by performing risk assessment
      procedures - Used as audit evidence

Information obtained by performing risk assessment procedures and related
activities may be used by the auditor as audit evidence to support assessments of
the risks of material misstatement. In addition, the auditor may obtain audit
evidence about classes of transactions, account balances, or disclosures and related

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.16  AUDITING AND ETHICS

assertions and about the operating effectiveness of controls, even though such
procedures were not specifically planned as substantive procedures or as tests of
controls. The auditor also may choose to perform substantive procedures or tests
of controls concurrently with risk assessment procedures because it is efficient to
do so.

Test Your Understanding 4

Jo Jo Limited is planning to list on Bombay Stock Exchange next year. As an auditor
of Jo Jo Limited, identify any one reason of increased audit risk due to listing of the
company next year.

Test Your Understanding 5

On perusing financial statements of Jo Jo Limited put up for audit, it is observed by
the auditor that current ratio has improved from 1.20:1 (in preceding year) to 1.75:1
(in current year). Identify what kind of risk assessment procedures are being
performed by auditor? Has it any relation with listing of the company next year on
Bombay Stock Exchange?

    2. MATERIALITY

2.1 What is meant by materiality?

SA 320 Materiality in Planning and Performing an Audit states that
misstatements, including omissions, are considered to be material if they,
individually or in the aggregate, could reasonably be expected to influence the
economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.

The objective of an independent auditor is to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement,
whether due to fraud or error, thereby enabling the auditor to express an opinion
on whether the financial statements are prepared, in all material respects, in
accordance with an applicable financial reporting framework.

Herein, lies the significance of materiality. The auditor has to obtain reasonable
assurance that financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement
whether due to fraud or error. As a result, an audit strives to identify significant

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.17

risks of material misstatement and audit procedures are geared towards it.

Materiality is not always a matter of relative size. For example, a small amount lost
by fraudulent practices of certain employees can indicate a serious flaw in the
enterprise's internal control system requiring immediate attention to avoid greater
losses in future.

2.2 Materiality in Planning and performing an audit-
      Auditor's responsibility

The concept of materiality is applied by the auditor both in planning and
performing the audit, and in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on
the audit and of uncorrected misstatements, if any, on the financial statements and
in forming the opinion in the auditor's report. SA 320 deals with auditor's
responsibility to apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing an
audit of financial statements.

Financial reporting frameworks often discuss the concept of materiality in the
context of the preparation and presentation of financial statements. Although
financial reporting frameworks may discuss materiality in different terms, they
generally explain that:

· Misstatements, including omissions, are considered to be material if they,
       individually or in the aggregate, could reasonably be expected to influence the
       economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements;

· Judgments about materiality are made in the light of surrounding circumstances,
       and are affected by the size or nature of a misstatement, or a combination of
       both; and

· Judgments about matters that are material to users of the financial statements
       are based on a consideration of the common financial information needs of users
       as a group. The possible effect of misstatements on specific individual users,
       whose needs may vary widely, is not considered.

Such a discussion, if present in the applicable financial reporting framework,
provides a frame of reference to the auditor in determining materiality for the audit.
If the applicable financial reporting framework does not include a discussion of the
concept of materiality, the characteristics referred to above provide the auditor
with such a frame of reference.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.18  AUDITING AND ETHICS

In planning the audit, the auditor makes judgments about the size of misstatements
that will be considered material. These judgments provide a basis for:

(a) Determining the nature, timing and extent of risk assessment procedures;

(b) Identifying and assessing the risks of material misstatement; and

(c) Determining the nature, timing and extent of further audit procedures.

The materiality determined when planning the audit does not necessarily establish
an amount below which uncorrected misstatements, individually or in aggregate,
will always be evaluated as immaterial. The circumstances related to some
misstatements may cause the auditor to evaluate them as material even if they are
below materiality. Although, it is not practicable to design audit procedures to
detect misstatements that could be material solely because of their nature, the
auditor considers not only the size but also the nature of uncorrected
misstatements, and the particular circumstances of their occurrence, when
evaluating their effect on the financial statements.

The auditor has to apply his professional judgement in determining materiality,
choosing appropriate benchmark and determining level of benchmark. Materiality
forms the basis for determination of audit scope and the levels of testing the
transactions.

While judging materiality, the significance of an item has to be viewed from
different perspectives. Materiality of an item may be judged by considering the
impact on the profit and loss, or on the balance sheet, or in the total of the category
of expenditure or income to which it pertains, and on its comparison with the
corresponding figure for the previous year.

If there is any statutory requirement of disclosure, it is to be considered material
irrespective of the value of amount. Examples are given below: -

 As per Division I of schedule III of the Companies Act, 2013, any item of
       income or expenditure which exceeds one percent of the revenue from
       operations or ` 1,00,000, whichever is higher, needs to be disclosed
       separately.

 A company should disclose in notes to accounts, shares in the company held
       by each shareholder holding more than 5 per cent shares specifying the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.19

       number of shares held as per requirements of Division I of Schedule III of the
       Companies Act,2013.

2.3 Determination of materiality- a matter of professional
      judgment

The auditor's determination of materiality is a matter of professional judgment, and
is affected by the auditor's perception of the financial information needs of users
of the financial statements. In this context, it is reasonable for the auditor to assume
that users:

(a) Have a reasonable knowledge of business and economic activities and
       accounting and a willingness to study the information in the financial
       statements with reasonable diligence;

(b) Understand that financial statements are prepared, presented and audited to
       levels of materiality;

(c) Recognize the uncertainties inherent in the measurement of amounts based
       on the use of estimates, judgment and the consideration of future events; and

(d) Make reasonable economic decisions on the basis of the information in the
       financial statements.

2.4 Performance Materiality

Practically, it is difficult for auditors to design tests to identify individual material
misstatements. It is likely that misstatements are material in aggregate. It takes us
to the concept of "performance materiality."

Performance materiality means the amount or amounts set by the auditor at less
than materiality for the financial statements as a whole to reduce to an
appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and
undetected misstatements exceeds materiality for the financial statements as a
whole. If applicable, performance materiality also refers to the amount or amounts
set by the auditor at less than the materiality level or levels for particular classes of
transactions, account balances or disclosures.

Performance materiality is set at a value lower than overall materiality. It lowers the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.20  AUDITING AND ETHICS

risk that auditor will not be able to identify misstatements that are material when
added together.

2.5 Determining Materiality and Performance Materiality
      when Planning the Audit

When establishing the overall audit strategy, the auditor shall determine materiality
for the financial statements as a whole. If, in the specific circumstances of the entity,
there is one or more particular classes of transactions, account balances or
disclosures for which misstatements of lesser amounts than the materiality for the
financial statements as a whole could reasonably be expected to influence the
economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements, the
auditor shall also determine the materiality level or levels to be applied to those
particular classes of transactions, account balances or disclosures.

2.6 Use of Benchmarks in Determining Materiality for the
      Financial Statements as a Whole

Determining materiality involves the exercise of professional judgment. A
percentage is often applied to a chosen benchmark as a starting point in
determining materiality for the financial statements as a whole. Factors that may
affect the identification of an appropriate benchmark include the following:

 The elements of the financial statements like assets, liabilities, equity,
       revenue, expenses

 Whether there are items on which the attention of the users of the particular
       entity's financial statements tends to be focused. For example, for the
       purpose of evaluating financial performance users may tend to focus on
       profit, revenue or net assets.

 The nature of the entity, where the entity is at in its life cycle, and the industry
       and economic environment in which the entity operates, the entity's
       ownership structure and the way it is financed. For example, If an entity is
       financed solely by debt rather than equity, users may put more emphasis on
       assets, and claims on them, than on the entity's earnings;

 The relative volatility of the benchmark.

Examples of benchmarks that may be appropriate, depending on the circumstances
of the entity, include categories of reported income such as profit before tax, total

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL  3.21

revenue, gross profit and total expenses, total equity or net asset value.

Profit before tax from continuing operations is often used for profit-oriented
entities. When profit before tax from continuing operations is volatile, other
benchmarks may be more appropriate, such as gross profit or total revenues.

2.6.1 Chosen Benchmark ­ Relevant financial data

In relation to the chosen benchmark, relevant financial data ordinarily includes: -

 Prior periods' financial results and financial positions,
 The period to-date financial results and financial position, and
 Budgets or forecasts for the current period,
 Adjusted for significant changes in the circumstances of the entity (for

       example, a significant business acquisition) and relevant changes of
       conditions in the industry or economic environment in which the entity
       operates.

Consider, for example, when, as a starting point, the materiality for the financial
statements as a whole is determined for a particular entity based on a percentage
of profit before tax from continuing operations, circumstances that give rise to an
exceptional decrease or increase in such profit may lead the auditor to conclude
that the materiality for the financial statements as a whole is more appropriately
determined using a normalized profit before tax from continuing operations figure
based on past results.

2.6.2 Determining a percentage to be applied to a chosen benchmark
       involves the exercise of professional judgment.

There is a relationship between the percentage and the chosen benchmark, such
that a percentage applied to profit before tax from continuing operations will
normally be higher than a percentage applied to total revenue.

Consider, for example, that the auditor may consider 5% of profit before tax from
continuing operations to be appropriate for a profit-oriented entity in a
manufacturing industry, while the auditor may consider 1% of total revenue or total
expenses to be appropriate for a not-for-profit entity. Higher or lower percentages,
however, may be deemed appropriate in different circumstances.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.22  AUDITING AND ETHICS

2.7 Materiality Level or Levels for Particular Classes of
      Transactions, Account Balances or Disclosures

Factors that may indicate the existence of one or more particular classes of
transactions, account balances or disclosures for which misstatements of lesser
amounts than materiality for the financial statements as a whole could reasonably
be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the
financial statements include the following:

1. Whether law, regulations or the applicable financial reporting framework
       affect users' expectations regarding the measurement or disclosure of certain
       items like in case of related party transactions, and the remuneration of
       management and those charged with governance.

2. The key disclosures in relation to the industry in which the entity operates.
       For example, research and development costs for a pharmaceutical company.

3. Whether attention is focused on a particular aspect of the entity's business
       that is separately disclosed in the financial statements like in case of newly
       acquired business.

2.8 Revision in Materiality level as the Audit Progresses

Materiality for the financial statements as a whole (and, if applicable, the materiality
level or levels for particular classes of transactions, account balances or disclosures)
may need to be revised as a result of a change in circumstances that occurred
during the audit (for example, a decision to dispose of a major part of the entity's
business), new information, or a change in the auditor's understanding of the entity
and its operations as a result of performing further audit procedures.

If during the audit it appears as though actual financial results are likely to be
substantially different from the anticipated period end financial results that were
used initially to determine materiality for the financial statements as a whole, the
auditor revises that materiality.

If the auditor concludes that a lower materiality for the financial statements as a
whole (and, if applicable, materiality level or levels for particular classes of
transactions, account balances or disclosures) than that initially determined is
appropriate, the auditor shall determine whether it is necessary to revise
performance materiality, and whether the nature, timing and extent of the further
audit procedures remain appropriate.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.23

2.9 Documenting the Materiality

The audit documentation shall include the following amounts and the factors
considered in their determination:

(a) Materiality for the financial statements as a whole

(b) If applicable, the materiality level or levels for particular classes of
       transactions, account balances or disclosures

(c) Performance materiality and

(d) Any revision of (a)-(c) as the audit progressed

2.10 Materiality and Audit Risk

The concept of materiality is applied by the auditor both in planning and
performing the audit, and in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on
the audit and of uncorrected misstatements, if any, on the financial statements and
in forming the opinion in the auditor's report. In conducting an audit of financial
statements, the overall objectives of the auditor are to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, thereby enabling the auditor to
express an opinion on whether the financial statements are prepared, in all material
respects, in accordance with an applicable financial reporting framework; and to
report on the financial statements, and communicate as required by the SAs, in
accordance with the auditor's findings. The auditor obtains reasonable assurance
by obtaining sufficient appropriate audit evidence to reduce audit risk to an
acceptably low level.

Audit risk is the risk that the auditor expresses an inappropriate audit opinion when
the financial statements are materially misstated. Audit risk is a function of the risks
of material misstatement and detection risk.

Materiality and Audit Risk are considered throughout the audit, in particular,
when:

(a) Identifying and assessing the risks of material misstatement;

(b) Determining the nature, timing and extent of further audit procedures; and

(c) Evaluating the effect of uncorrected misstatements, if any, on the financial
       statements and in forming the opinion in the auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.24  AUDITING AND ETHICS

ILLUSTRATION 3

One of the team members of auditors of Highly Capable Limited was of the view that
Materiality and Audit Risk are only considered at planning stage of an audit.
Comment as an auditor

SOLUTION

The concept of materiality is applied by the auditor both in planning and
performing the audit, and in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on
the audit and of uncorrected misstatements, if any, on the financial statements and
in forming the opinion in the auditor's report.

Test Your Understanding 6

CA A. Raja is auditor of Build Well Forgings Private Limited having a revenue of
` 25 crore. The company has been sanctioned a term loan of ` 50 lacs from a bank.
However, as at end of the year, only ` 1 lac was availed due to delay in procurement
of asset. The financial statements of the company do not disclose nature of security
against which loan has been taken. Schedule III of the Companies Act,2013 requires
disclosure in this respect. Discuss, whether, non-disclosure of nature of security is
material for auditor.

    3. UNDERSTANDING THE ENTITY AND ITS
          ENVIRONMENT

SA 315 Identifying and Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatement Through
Understanding the Entity and its Environment states that the auditor shall obtain
an understanding of the following: -

(a) Relevant industry, regulatory, and other external factors including the
       applicable financial reporting framework

       Relevant industry factors include industry conditions such as the competitive
       environment, supplier and customer relationships, and technological
       developments.

       Examples of matters the auditor may consider include market and
       competition, whether entity is engaged in seasonal activities, product

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.25

       technology relating to the entity's products. The industry in which the entity
       operates may give rise to specific risks of material misstatement arising from
       the nature of the business or the degree of regulation.

       Relevant regulatory factors include the regulatory environment. The
       regulatory environment includes, among other matters, the applicable
       financial reporting framework and the legal and political environment.

       Examples of matters the auditor may consider include accounting principles
       and industry specific practices, regulatory framework for a regulated industry,
       legislation and regulation that significantly affect the entity's operations,
       including direct supervisory activities, taxation, government policies currently
       affecting the conduct of the entity's business, environmental requirements
       affecting the industry and the entity's business.

       Examples of other external factors affecting the entity that the auditor may
       consider include the general economic conditions, interest rates and
       availability of financing, and inflation etc.

(b) The nature of the entity, including: -

       (i) its operations;

       (ii) its ownership and governance structures;

       (iii) the types of investments that the entity is making and plans to make,
               including investments in special-purpose entities; and

       (iv) the way that the entity is structured and how it is financed; to enable
               the auditor to understand the classes of transactions, account balances,
               and disclosures to be expected in the financial statements.

       An understanding of nature of entity enables the auditor to understand
       whether entity has a complex structure for example, whether it has
       subsidiaries. Complex structures often introduce issues that may give rise to
       risks of material misstatement. It also helps in understanding matters relating
       to the ownership, and relations between owners and other people or entities.
       This understanding assists in determining whether related party transactions
       have been identified and accounted for appropriately.

       Examples of matters that the auditor may consider while obtaining
       understanding of nature of entity include: -

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.26  AUDITING AND ETHICS

        Business operations such as nature of revenue sources, products or
               services, conduct of operations, location of production facilities, key
               customers and suppliers of goods and services

        Investment and investment activities such as capital investment
               activities and planned or recently executed acquisitions

        Financing and financing activities such as major subsidiaries, debt
               structure etc.

        Financial reporting such as accounting principles and revenue
               recognition practices

(c) The entity's selection and application of accounting policies, including
       the reasons for changes thereto

       The auditor shall evaluate whether the entity's accounting policies are
       appropriate for its business and consistent with the applicable financial
       reporting framework and accounting policies used in the relevant industry.

(d) The entity's objectives and strategies, and those related business risks
       that may result in risks of material misstatement.

       The entity conducts its business in the context of industry, regulatory and
       other internal and external factors. To respond to these factors, the entity's
       management define objectives, which are the overall plans for the entity.
       Strategies are the approaches by which management intends to achieve its
       objectives. The entity's objectives and strategies may change over time.
       Business risk is broader than the risk of material misstatement of the financial
       statements, though it includes the latter. Business risk may arise from change
       or complexity.

       An understanding of the business risks facing the entity increases the
       likelihood of identifying risks of material misstatement, since most business
       risks will eventually have financial consequences and, therefore, an effect on
       the financial statements. However, the auditor does not have a responsibility
       to identify or assess all business risks because not all business risks give rise
       to risks of material misstatement.

       Examples of matters that the auditor may consider when obtaining an
       understanding of the entity's objectives, strategies and related business risks

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.27

       that may result in a risk of material misstatement of the financial statements
       include: -

        Industry developments (a potential related business risk might be, for
               example, that the entity does not have the personnel or expertise to
               deal with the changes in the industry).

        New products and services (a potential related business risk might be,
               for example, that there is increased product liability).

        Expansion of the business (a potential related business risk might be,
               for example, that the demand has not been accurately estimated).

(e) The measurement and review of the entity's financial performance

       Management and others will measure and review those things they regard as
       important. Performance measures, whether external or internal, create
       pressures on the entity. These pressures, in turn, may motivate management
       to take action to improve the business performance or to misstate the
       financial statements. Accordingly, an understanding of the entity's
       performance measures assists the auditor in considering whether pressures
       to achieve performance targets may result in management actions that
       increase the risks of material misstatement, including those due to fraud.

       Examples for measuring and reviewing financial performance which may be
       used by an auditor may include: -

        Key performance indicators (financial and non-financial) and key ratios,
               trends and operating statistics.

        Period-on-period financial performance analyses.

        Budgets, forecasts, variance analyses, and departmental or other level
               performance reports.

        Credit rating agency reports

3.1 Why understanding the entity and its environment is
      significant?

Understanding the entity and the environment in which it operates is very
significant. It helps the auditor in planning the audit and in identifying areas
requiring special attention. Gaining knowledge about client's business is one of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.28  AUDITING AND ETHICS

important principles in developing an overall audit plan. In fact, without adequate
knowledge of client's business, a proper audit is not possible.

3.2 Understanding the entity-a continuous process

Obtaining an understanding of the entity and its environment, including the entity's
internal control (referred to hereafter as an "understanding of the entity"), is a
continuous, dynamic process of gathering, updating and analysing information
throughout the audit. The understanding establishes a frame of reference within
which the auditor plans the audit and exercises professional judgment throughout
the audit, for example, when:

 Assessing risks of material misstatement of the financial statements

 Determining materiality in accordance with SA 320

 Considering the appropriateness of the selection and application of
       accounting policies

 Identifying areas where special audit consideration may be necessary, for
       example, related party transactions, the appropriateness of management's
       use of the going concern assumption, or considering the business purpose of
       transactions

 Developing expectations for use when performing analytical procedures

 Evaluating the sufficiency and appropriateness of audit evidence obtained
       such as the appropriateness of assumptions and of management's oral and
       written representations.

ILLUSTRATION 4

The auditor of ABC Textiles Ltd chalks out an audit plan without understanding the
entity's business. Since he has carried out many audits of textile companies, there is
no need to understand the nature of business of ABC Ltd. Advise the auditor how he
should proceed.

SOLUTION

Obtaining an understanding of the entity and its environment, including the entity's
internal control (referred to hereafter as an "understanding of the entity"), is a
continuous, dynamic process of gathering, updating and analysing information

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL  3.29

throughout the audit. The auditor should proceed accordingly.

ILLUSTRATION 5

While auditing the books of accounts of Heavy Material Limited for the financial year
2022-23, a team member of the auditor of Heavy Material Limited showed no
inclination towards understanding the business and the business environment of the
above mentioned company. Is the approach of team member of the auditor of Heavy
Material Limited correct or incorrect? Also give reason for your answer.

SOLUTION

The approach of team member of the auditor of Heavy Material Limited is incorrect
because understanding the business and the business environment of company
whose audit is to be conducted is very important, as it helps in planning the audit
and identifying areas requiring special attention during the course of audit of that
company.

ILLUSTRATION 6

Prince Blankets is engaged in business of blankets. Its major portion of sales is taking
place through internet. Advise the auditor how he would proceed in this regard as to
understanding the entity and its environment.

SOLUTION

While understanding entity and its environment, internet sales is being perceived
as risky area by the auditor and thereby would be spending substantial time and
extensive audit procedures on this particular area.

    4. INTERNAL CONTROL

4.1 Meaning of Internal Control

As per SA-315, "Identifying and Assessing the Risk of Material Misstatement
Through Understanding the Entity and its Environment", the internal control
may be defined as "the process designed, implemented and maintained by those
charged with governance, management and other personnel to provide reasonable
assurance about the achievement of an entity's objectives with regard to reliability
of financial reporting, effectiveness and efficiency of operations, safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The term "controls"

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.30  AUDITING AND ETHICS

refers to any aspects of one or more of the components of internal control."

4.2 As derived from above definition, the purpose of
      Internal Control is as under

Internal control is designed, implemented and maintained to address identified
business risks that threaten the achievement of any of the entity's objectives that
concern:

 The reliability of the entity's financial reporting;
 The effectiveness and efficiency of its operations;
 Its compliance with applicable laws and regulations; and
 Safeguarding of assets.

The way in which internal control is designed, implemented and maintained varies
with an entity's size and complexity.

4.3 Benefits of Understanding of Internal Control

An understanding of internal control assists the auditor in: -
(i) Identifying types of potential misstatements;
(ii) Identifying factors that affect the risks of material misstatement, and
(iii) Designing the nature, timing, and extent of further audit procedures.

4.4 Limitations of Internal Control

(i) Internal control can provide only reasonable assurance
       Internal control, no matter how effective, can provide an entity with only
       reasonable assurance about achieving the entity's financial reporting
       objectives. The likelihood of their achievement is affected by inherent
       limitations of internal control.

(ii) Human judgment in decision-making
       Realities that human judgment in decision-making can be faulty and that
       breakdowns in internal control can occur because of human error. For
       example, there may be an error in the design of, or in the change to, a control.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.31

(iii) Lack of understanding the purpose

       Equally, the operation of a control may not be effective, such as where
       information produced for the purposes of internal control (for example, an
       exception report) is not effectively used because the individual responsible
       for reviewing the information does not understand its purpose or fails to take
       appropriate action.

(iv) Collusion among People

       Additionally, controls can be circumvented by the collusion of two or more
       people or inappropriate management override of internal control. For
       example, management may enter into side agreements with customers that
       alter the terms and conditions of the entity's standard sales contracts, which
       may result in improper revenue recognition. Also, edit checks in a software
       program that are designed to identify and report transactions that exceed
       specified credit limits may be overridden or disabled.

(v) Judgements by Management

       Further, in designing and implementing controls, management may make
       judgments on the nature and extent of the controls it chooses to implement,
       and the nature and extent of the risks it chooses to assume.

(vi) Limitations in case of Small Entities

       Smaller entities often have fewer employees due to which segregation of
       duties is not practicable. However, in a small owner-managed entity, the
       owner-manager may be able to exercise more effective oversight than in a
       larger entity. This oversight may compensate for the generally more limited
       opportunities for segregation of duties. On the other hand, the owner-
       manager may be more able to override controls because the system of
       internal control is less structured. This is taken into account by the auditor
       when identifying the risks of material misstatement due to fraud.

ILLUSTRATION 7

Auditor GR and Associates, appointed for audit of PNG Ltd, a manufacturing company
engaged in manufacturing of various food items. While planning an audit, the auditor
does not think that it would be necessary to understand internal controls. Advise the
auditor in this regard.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.32  AUDITING AND ETHICS

SOLUTION

The auditor shall obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit.
Although most controls relevant to the audit are likely to relate to financial
reporting, not all controls that relate to financial reporting are relevant to the audit.
It is a matter of the auditor's professional judgment whether a control, individually or
in combination with others, is relevant to the audit.

ILLUSTRATION 8

The team member of the auditor of Simple and Easy Limited was of the view that
understanding the internal control of the company would not help them in any
manner in relation to audit procedures to be applied while conducting the audit.

SOLUTION

The view of the team member of the auditor is incorrect because understanding
the internal control of the company would help the auditor and his team members
in designing the nature, timing and extent of audit procedures to be applied while
conducting the audit of the company.

4.5 Components of Internal Control

The division of internal control into the following five components provides a useful
framework for auditors to consider how different aspects of an entity's internal
control may affect the audit: -

(A) The control environment

(B) The entity's risk assessment process

(C) The information system, including the related business processes, relevant to
       financial reporting, and communication

(D) Control activities

(E) Monitoring of controls

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL                                3.33

                                                  Components of
                                                  Internal control

   Control   Entity's risk    Information  Control activities       Monitoring of
environment  assessment       system and                               controls
                            communiaction
               process

4.5(A) Control Environment

The auditor shall obtain an understanding of the control environment. As part of
obtaining this understanding, the auditor shall evaluate whether:
(i) Management has created and maintained a culture of honesty and ethical

       behaviour and
(ii) The strengths in the control environment elements collectively provide an

       appropriate foundation for the other components of internal control.
What is included in Control Environment?
The control environment includes:
(i) the governance and management functions and
(ii) the attitudes, awareness, and actions of those charged with governance and

       management.
(iii) the control environment sets the tone of an organization, influencing the

       control consciousness of its people.
Elements of the Control Environment
Elements of the control environment that may be relevant when obtaining an
understanding of the control environment include the following:
(a) Communication and enforcement of integrity and ethical values

       The effectiveness of controls cannot rise above the integrity and ethical
       values of the people who create, administer, and monitor them. Integrity and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.34  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       ethical behaviour are the product of the entity's ethical and behavioural
       standards, how they are communicated, and how they are reinforced in
       practice. The enforcement of integrity and ethical values includes, for
       example, management actions to eliminate or mitigate incentives or
       temptations that might prompt personnel to engage in dishonest, illegal, or
       unethical acts. The communication of entity policies on integrity and ethical
       values may include the communication of behavioural standards to personnel
       through policy statements and codes of conduct and by example.

(b) Commitment to competence

       Matters such as management's consideration of the competence levels for
       particular jobs and how those levels translate into requisite skills and
       knowledge.

(c) Participation by those charged with governance

       It includes attributes of those charged with governance such as their
       independence from management, their experience and stature, the extent of
       their involvement and the information they receive and the scrutiny of
       activities.

(d) Management's philosophy and operating style

       Management's philosophy and operating style encompass a broad range of
       characteristics. For example, management's attitudes and actions towards
       financial reporting- what approach is taken by management in selecting
       accounting policies, approach in developing accounting estimates etc.
       Matters such as approach of management to taking and managing business
       risks, management's attitude towards information processing and accounting
       function and personnel reflects upon management's philosophy and
       operating style.

(e) Organisational structure

       The framework within which an entity's activities for achieving its objectives
       are planned, executed, controlled, and reviewed. Establishing a relevant
       organisational structure includes considering key areas of authority and
       responsibility and appropriate lines of reporting. The appropriateness of an
       entity's organisational structure depends, in part, on its size and the nature
       of its activities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.35

(f) Assignment of authority and responsibility

       Matters such as how authority and responsibility for operating activities are
       assigned and how reporting relationships and authorisation hierarchies are
       established.

(g) Human resource policies and practices

       Policies and practices that relate to, for example, recruitment, orientation,
       training, evaluation, counselling, promotion, compensation, and remedial
       actions. Human resource policies and practices often demonstrate important
       matters in relation to the control consciousness of an entity.

       For example, standards for recruiting the most qualified individuals ­ with
       emphasis on educational background, prior work experience, past
       accomplishments, and evidence of integrity and ethical behaviour ­
       demonstrate an entity's commitment to competent and trustworthy people.
       Training policies that communicate prospective roles and responsibilities and
       include practices such as training schools and seminars illustrate expected
       levels of performance and behaviour. Promotions driven by periodic
       performance appraisals demonstrate the entity's commitment to the
       advancement of qualified personnel to higher levels of responsibility.

Existence of a satisfactory control environment-not an absolute deterrent to
fraud

The existence of a satisfactory control environment can be a positive factor when the
auditor assesses the risks of material misstatement. However, although it may help
reduce the risk of fraud, a satisfactory control environment is not an absolute
deterrent to fraud. Conversely, deficiencies in the control environment may
undermine the effectiveness of controls, in particular in relation to fraud. For
example, management's failure to commit sufficient resources to address IT security
risks may adversely affect internal control by allowing improper changes to be made
to computer programs or to data, or unauthorized transactions to be processed.

The control environment in itself does not prevent, or detect and correct, a material
misstatement. It may, however, influence the auditor's evaluation of the
effectiveness of other controls (for example, the monitoring of controls and the
operation of specific control activities) and thereby, the auditor's assessment of the
risks of material misstatement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.36  AUDITING AND ETHICS

4.5(B) The Entity's Risk Assessment Process

The auditor shall obtain an understanding of whether the entity has a process for:

(a) Identifying business risks relevant to financial reporting objectives

(b) Estimating the significance of the risks

(c) Assessing the likelihood of their occurrence

(d) Deciding about actions to address those risks

The entity's risk assessment process forms the basis for the risks to be managed. If
that process is appropriate, it would assist the auditor in identifying risks of material
misstatement. Risks can arise or change due to factor such as new technology, new
business models, products or activities, changes in operating environment etc.
Whether the entity's risk assessment process is appropriate to the circumstances is
a matter of judgment.

4.5(C) The information system, including the related
      business processes, relevant to financial reporting and
      communication

The auditor shall obtain an understanding of the information system, including the
related business processes, relevant to financial reporting, including the following
areas: -

(a) The classes of transactions in the entity's operations that are significant to
       the financial statements

(b) The procedures by which those transactions are initiated, recorded,
       processed, corrected as necessary, transferred to the general ledger and
       reported in the financial statements

(c) The related accounting records, supporting information and specific accounts
       in the financial statements that are used to initiate, record, process and report
       transactions

(d) How the information system captures events and conditions that are
       significant to the financial statements

(e) The financial reporting process used to prepare the entity's financial
       statements

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.37

(f) Controls surrounding journal entries.

An information system consists of infrastructure (physical and hardware
components), software, people, procedures, and data. Many information systems
make extensive use of information technology (IT). Information system should
provide qualitative financial information. The quality of system-generated
information affects management's ability to make appropriate decisions in
managing and controlling the entity's activities and to prepare reliable financial
reports.

The auditor shall obtain an understanding of how the entity communicates financial
reporting roles and responsibilities. It may take such forms as policy manuals,
accounting and financial reporting manuals, and memoranda. Communication also
can be made electronically, orally, and through the actions of management.

4.5(D) Control Activities

The auditor shall obtain an understanding of control activities relevant to the audit,
which the auditor considers necessary to assess the risks of material misstatement.
An audit requires an understanding of only those control activities related to
significant class of transactions, account balance, and disclosure in the financial
statements and the assertions which the auditor finds relevant in his risk
assessment process. Control activities are the policies and procedures that help
ensure that management directives are carried out. Control activities, whether
within IT or manual systems, have various objectives and are applied at various
organisational and functional levels.

Control activities relevant to audit generally include policies and procedures
relating to performance reviews (reviews of actual performance with budgets),
information processing (for example controls over checking arithmetical accuracy
of records, program change controls etc), physical controls( like controls over
physical security of assets) and segregation of duties (controls over ensuring that
different people are assigned the responsibilities of authorising transactions,
recording transactions and maintaining custody of assets)

4.5(E) Monitoring of Controls

The auditor shall obtain an understanding of the major activities that the entity
uses to monitor internal control over financial reporting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.38  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Monitoring of controls is a process to assess the effectiveness of internal control
performance over time. It helps in assessing the effectiveness of controls on a
timely basis. It involves assessing the effectiveness of controls on a timely basis and
taking necessary remedial actions. It includes considering whether controls are
operating as intended and that they are modified as appropriate for change in
conditions.

Management accomplishes monitoring of controls through ongoing activities,
separate evaluations, or a combination of the two. Ongoing monitoring activities
are often built into the normal recurring activities of an entity and include regular
management and supervisory activities.

Management's monitoring activities may include using information from
communications from external parties such as customer complaints and regulator
comments that may indicate problems or highlight areas in need of improvement.

Test Your Understanding 7

CA Smriti is auditor of a company. As part of audit, she is going through company
policies and practices regarding employee recruitment, training, orientation and
related matters. She seems to be very much interested in finding out whether
company hires best candidates from applicant pool. Identify what she is trying to
do? How gaining knowledge about this aspect is useful to her as an auditor?

Test Your Understanding 8

During the audit of same company, CA Smriti is keen to find out whether there
exists a proper system of segregation of duties in the company. She wants to be
sure that a person responsible for recording a transaction is different from the
person authorising it. Discuss what she is trying to do and how its understanding
is significant to her as an auditor.

4.6 Are all Controls Relevant to the audit?

There is a direct relationship between an entity's objectives and the control it
implements to provide reasonable assurance about their achievement. The entity's
objectives, and therefore controls, relate to financial reporting, operations and
compliance; however, not all of these objectives and controls are relevant to the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.39

auditor's risk assessment.

Factors relevant to the auditor's judgment about whether a control, individually or
in combination with others, is relevant to the audit may include such matters as the
following:

 Materiality.

 The significance of the related risk.

 The size of the entity.

 The nature of the entity's business, including its organisation and ownership
       characteristics.

 The diversity and complexity of the entity's operations.

 Applicable legal and regulatory requirements.

 The circumstances and the applicable component of internal control.

 The nature and complexity of the systems that are part of the entity's internal
       control, including the use of service organisations.

 Whether, and how, a specific control, individually or in combination with
       others, prevents, or detects and corrects, material misstatement.

4.7 Controls over the completeness and accuracy of
      information

Controls over the completeness and accuracy of information produced by the entity
may be relevant to the audit if the auditor intends to make use of the information
in designing and performing further procedures. For example, in auditing revenue
by applying standard prices to records of sales volume, the auditor considers the
accuracy of the price information and the completeness and accuracy of the sales
volume data. Controls relating to operations and compliance objectives may also
be relevant to an audit if they relate to data the auditor evaluates or uses in
applying audit procedures.

4.8 Internal control over safeguarding of assets

Internal control over safeguarding of assets against unauthorised acquisition, use,
or disposition may include controls relating to both financial reporting and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.40  AUDITING AND ETHICS

operations objectives. The auditor's consideration of such controls is generally
limited to those relevant to the reliability of financial reporting. For example, use
of access controls, such as passwords, that limit access to the data and programs
that process cash disbursements may be relevant to a financial statement audit.
Conversely, safeguarding controls relating to operations objectives, such as
controls to prevent the excessive use of materials in production, generally are not
relevant to a financial statement audit.

4.9 Controls relating to objectives that are not relevant to
      an audit

An entity generally has controls relating to objectives that are not relevant to an
audit and therefore need not be considered. For example, an entity may rely on a
sophisticated system of automated controls to provide efficient and effective
operations (such as an airline's system of automated controls to maintain flight
schedules), but these controls ordinarily would not be relevant to the audit. Further,
although internal control applies to the entire entity or to any of its operating units
or business processes, an understanding of internal control relating to each of the
entity's operating units and business processes may not be relevant to the audit.

In certain circumstances, the statute or the regulation governing the entity may
require the auditor to report on compliance with certain specific aspects of internal
controls as a result, the auditor's review of internal control may be broader and
more detailed.

4.10 Nature and Extent of the Understanding of Relevant
      Controls

Evaluating the design of a control involves considering whether the control,
individually or in combination with other controls, is capable of effectively
preventing, or detecting and correcting, material misstatements. Implementation
of a control means that the control exists and that the entity is using it. There is
little point in assessing the implementation of a control that is not effective, and so
the design of a control is considered first.

An improperly designed control may represent a significant deficiency in internal
control. Risk assessment procedures to obtain audit evidence about the design and
implementation of relevant controls may include-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL  3.41

 Inquiring of entity personnel.

 Observing the application of specific controls.

 Inspecting documents and reports.

 Tracing transactions through the information system relevant to financial
       reporting.

Inquiry alone, however, is not sufficient for such purposes.

Obtaining an understanding of an entity's controls is not sufficient to test their
operating effectiveness, unless there is some automation that provides for the
consistent operation of the controls. For example, obtaining audit evidence about
the implementation of a manual control at a point in time does not provide audit
evidence about the operating effectiveness of the control at other times during the
period under audit. However, because of the inherent consistency of IT processing,
performing audit procedures to determine whether an automated control has been
implemented may serve as a test of that control's operating effectiveness,
depending on the auditor's assessment and testing of controls such as those over
program changes.

    5. RISKS THAT REQUIRE SPECIAL AUDIT
          CONSIDERATION

As part of the risk assessment, the auditor shall determine whether any of the risks
identified are, in the auditor's judgment, a significant risk. In exercising judgment as
to which risks are significant risks, the auditor shall consider at least the following:
(a) Whether the risk is a risk of fraud

(b) Whether the risk is related to recent significant economic, accounting, or
       other developments like changes in regulatory environment, etc., and,
       therefore, requires specific attention

(c) The complexity of transactions
(d) Whether the risk involves significant transactions with related parties
(e) The degree of subjectivity in the measurement of financial information

       related to the risk, especially those measurements involving a wide range of
       measurement uncertainty and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.42  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(f) Whether the risk involves significant transactions that are outside the normal
       course of business for the entity, or that otherwise appear to be unusual.

5.1 Identifying Significant Risks

Significant risks often relate to significant non-routine transactions or judgmental
matters. Non-routine transactions are transactions that are unusual, due to either
size or nature, and that therefore occur infrequently. Judgmental matters may
include the development of accounting estimates for which there is significant
measurement uncertainty. Significant risks are inherent risks with both a higher
likelihood of occurrence and a higher magnitude of potential misstatement. The
auditor assesses assertions affected by a significant risk as higher inherent risk. The
following are always significant risks:

 Risks of material misstatement due to fraud
 Significant transactions with related parties that are outside the normal course

       of business for the entity

5.2 Risks of Material Misstatement ­ Greater for
      Significant Non-Routine Transactions

Risks of material misstatement may be greater for significant non-routine
transactions arising from matters such as the following:

 Greater management intervention to specify the accounting treatment.

 Greater manual intervention for data collection and processing.

 Complex calculations or accounting principles.

 The nature of non-routine transactions, which may make it difficult for the
       entity to implement effective controls over the risks.

5.3 Risks of material misstatement­ Greater for Significant
      Judgmental Matters

Risks of material misstatement may be greater for significant judgmental matters
that require the development of accounting estimates, arising from matters such
as the following:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.43

 Accounting principles for accounting estimates or revenue recognition may
       be subject to differing interpretation.

 Required judgment may be subjective or complex, or require assumptions
       about the effects of future events, for example, judgment about fair value.

    6. EVALUATION OF INTERNAL CONTROL
          SYSTEM

So far as the auditor is concerned, the examination and evaluation of the internal
control system is an indispensable part of the overall audit programme. The auditor
needs reasonable assurance that the accounting system is adequate and that all
the accounting information which should be recorded has in fact been recorded.
Internal control normally contributes to such assurance.

6.1 Benefits of Evaluation of Internal Control to the
      Auditor

The review of internal controls will enable the auditor to know:

(i) whether errors and frauds are likely to be located in the ordinary course of
       operations of the business

(ii) whether an adequate internal control system is in use and operating as
       planned by the management

(iii) whether an effective internal auditing department is operating

(iv) whether any administrative control has a bearing on his work (for example, if
       the control over worker recruitment and enrolment is weak, there is a
       likelihood of dummy names being included in the wages sheet and this is
       relevant for the auditor)

(v) whether the controls adequately safeguard the assets

(vi) how far and how adequately the management is discharging its function in
       so far as correct recording of transactions is concerned

(vii) how reliable the reports, records and the certificates to the management can
       be

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.44  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(viii) the extent and the depth of the examination that he needs to carry out in the
       different areas of accounting

(ix) what would be appropriate audit technique and the audit procedure in the
       given circumstances

(x) what are the areas where control is weak and where it is excessive and

(xi) whether some worthwhile suggestions can be given to improve the control
       system.

ILLUSTRATION 9

Mr. Y, one of the team member of the auditors of What and Where Limited was very
keen in knowing whether the internal control of the company would safeguard the
company's assets. Advise Mr. Y.

SOLUTION

The review of internal controls will enable the auditors to know whether the
controls adequately safeguard the assets.

ILLUSTRATION 10

Mr. H, a team member of the auditor of There and Here Limited was of the view that
evaluation of internal control of the company would help in identifying the areas
where internal control is weak. Advise

SOLUTION

The review of internal controls will enable the auditor to know what are the areas
where control is weak and where it is excessive.
Formulate Audit Program after understanding Internal Control

The auditor can formulate his entire audit programme only after he has had a
satisfactory understanding of the internal control systems and their actual
operation. If he does not care to study this aspect, it is very likely that his audit
programme may become unwieldy and unnecessarily heavy and the object of the
audit may be altogether lost in the mass of entries and vouchers. It is also important
for him to know whether the system is actually in operation. Often, after installation
of a system, no proper follow up is there by the management to ensure compliance.
The auditor, in such circumstances, may be led to believe that a system is in
operation which in reality may not be altogether in operation or may at best
operate only partially. This state of affairs is probably the worst that an auditor may

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.45

come across and he would be in the midst of confusion, if he does not take care.

It would be better if the auditor can undertake the review of the internal control
system of client. This will give him enough time to assimilate the controls and
implications and will enable him to be more objective in the framing of the audit
programme. He will also be in a position to bring to the notice of the management
the weaknesses of the system and to suggest measures for improvement. At a
further interim date or in the course of the audit, he may ascertain how far the
weaknesses have been removed.

From the foregoing, it can be concluded that the extent and the nature of the audit
programme is substantially influenced by the internal control system in operation.
In deciding upon a plan of test checking, the existence and operation of internal
control system is of great significance. A proper understanding of the internal
control system in its content and working also enables an auditor to decide upon
the appropriate audit procedure to be applied in different areas to be covered in
the audit programme.

In a situation where the internal controls are considered weak in some areas, the
auditor might choose an auditing procedure or test that otherwise might not be
required; he might extend certain tests to cover a large number of transactions or
other items than he otherwise would examine and at times he may perform
additional tests to bring him the necessary satisfaction.

For example, normally the distribution of wages is not observed by the auditor. But
if the internal control over wages is so weak that there exists a possibility of dummy
workers being paid, the auditor might include observation of wages distribution in
his programme in order to find out the workers who do not turn up for receipt of
wages.

On the other hand, if he is satisfied with the internal control on sales and trade
receivables, the auditor can get trade receivables' balances confirmed at almost any
time reasonably close to the balance sheet date. But if the control is weak, he may
feel that he should get the confirmation exactly on the date of the year closing so
that he may eliminate the risk of errors and frauds occurring between the
intervening period. Also, he may in that situation, decide to have a large coverage
of trade receivables by the confirmation procedure.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           3.46  AUDITING AND ETHICS

6.2 Evaluation of Internal Control­ Methods

A review of the internal control can be done by a process of study, examination and
evaluation of the control system installed by the management. The first step
involves determination of the control and procedures laid down by the
management. By reading company manuals, studying organisation charts and flow
charts and by making suitable enquiries from the officers and employees, the
auditor may ascertain the character, scope and efficacy of the control system.

The auditor must ask the right people the right questions if he is to get the
information he wants. It would be better if he makes written notes of the relevant
information and procedures contained in the manual or ascertained on enquiry. To
facilitate the accumulation of the information necessary for the proper review and
evaluation of internal controls, the auditor can use one of the following to help him
to know and assimilate the system and evaluate the same:

(A) Narrative record

(B) Check List

(C) Internal Control questionnaire and

(D) Flow chart

                 Methods of evaluation of
                       internal control

Narrative        Check list  Internal Control  Flow Chart
  record                      questionnaire

6.2(A) The Narrative Record

This is a complete and exhaustive description of the system as found in operation
by the auditor. Actual testing and observation are necessary before such a record
can be developed. It may be recommended in cases where no formal control system
is in operation and would be more suited to small business.
The basic disadvantages of narrative records are:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.47

(i) To comprehend the system in operation is quite difficult.

(ii) To identify weaknesses or gaps in the system.

(iii) To incorporate changes arising on account of reshuffling of manpower, etc.

6.2(B) Check List

This is a series of instructions and/or questions which a member of the auditing
staff must follow and/or answer. When he completes instruction, he initials the
space against the instruction. Answers to the check list instructions are usually
Yes, No or Not Applicable. This is again an on-the-job requirement and
instructions are framed having regard to the desirable elements of control.

Example

A few examples of check list instructions are given hereunder:

1. Are tenders called before placing orders?

2. Are the purchases made on the basis of a written order?

3. Is the purchase order form standardised?

4. Are purchase order forms pre-numbered?

5. Are the inventory control accounts maintained by persons who have nothing
       to do with custody of work, receipt of inventory, inspection of inventory and
       purchase of inventory?

The complete check list is studied by the Principal/Manager/Senior to ascertain
existence of internal control and evaluate its implementation and efficiency.

6.2(C) Internal Control Questionnaire

This is a comprehensive series of questions concerning internal control. This is the
most widely used form for collecting information about the existence, operation
and efficiency of internal control in an organisation. An important advantage of the
questionnaire approach is that oversight or omission of significant internal control
review procedures is less likely to occur with this method. With a proper
questionnaire, all internal control evaluation can be completed at one time or in
sections. The review can more easily be made on an interim basis. The questionnaire
form also provides an orderly means of disclosing control defects. It is the general

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.48  AUDITING AND ETHICS

practice to review the internal control system annually and record the review in
detail. In the questionnaire, generally questions are so framed that a `Yes' answer
denotes satisfactory position and a `No' answer suggests weakness. Provision is
made for an explanation or further details of `No' answers. In respect of questions
not relevant to the business, `Not Applicable' reply is given. The questionnaire is
usually issued to the client and the client is requested to get it filled by the
concerned executives and employees. If on a perusal of the answers, inconsistencies
or apparent incongruities are noticed, the matter is further discussed by auditor's
staff with the client's employees for a clear picture. The concerned auditor then
prepares a report of deficiencies and recommendations for improvement.

Few illustrative examples of Internal Control Questionnaire in different areas
of an entity are given as under:

Examples of Extracts of Internal Control Questionnaire in respect of purchases,
creditors, inventories and fixed assets

A. Purchases

(1) Are purchases centralised in the Purchase Department?

(2) (a) Are purchases made only from approved suppliers?

       (b) Is a list of approved suppliers maintained for this purpose?

       (c) Does the master list contain more than one source of supply for all
               important materials?

(3) Are the purchase orders based on valid purchase requisitions duly signed by
       authorised persons in this behalf?

(4) Are purchases based on competitive quotations from two or more suppliers?

(5) Are purchase orders pre-numbered?

(6) Are purchase orders signed only by employees authorized in this behalf?

(7) Are all materials received only in the Receiving Department?

(8) Are persons connected with receipt of materials and the keeping of receiving
       records denied authority to issue purchase orders or to approve invoices?

(9) Are materials inspected and counted, weighed or measured in the Receiving
       Department?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL  3.49

(10) Are receipt of materials evidenced by pre-numbered Goods Received Note?

B. Creditors
(1) (a) Are suppliers' invoices routed direct to the Accounts Department?

       (b) Are they entered in a Bill register before submitting them to other
               departments for check and/or approval?

       (c) Are advance and partial payments entered on the invoices before they
               are submitted to other departments?

(2) Does the system ensure that all invoices are duly processed?

(3) In respect of raw material and supplies, are reconciliations made of quantities
       and/or values received as shown by purchase invoices with receipt into stock
       records?

(4) Does the Accounts Department match the invoices of supplies with Goods
       Received Notes and purchase orders?

(5) Do all invoices bear evidence of being checked for prices, freight, terms etc.?

(6) Are all advance payments duly authorized by persons competent to authorize
       such payments?

(7) Are duplicate invoices marked immediately on receipt to avoid payment
       against them?

(8) Are all supplier's statements compared with ledger accounts?

(9) Is there any follow-up action to investigate difference, if any, between the
       suppliers' statements and the ledger accounts?

(10) Is a list of unpaid creditors prepared and reconciled periodically?
C. Inventories
(1) Are stocks stored in assigned areas?

(2) Are stocks insured comprehensively against different risks? If some risk is not
       insured, whether it is due to specific decision taken by a senior official?

(3) Is a record maintained for the insurance policies?

(4) Is the record reviewed periodically?

(5) Is there an official who decides on the value for which stocks are to be
       insured?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.50  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(6) Is the adequacy of insurance cover reviewed periodically?
(7) Are perpetual stock records kept for raw materials, work-in-progress, finished

       goods and stores?
(8) Are stock records periodically reconciled with accounting records?
(9) Where there is a system of perpetual inventory count:

       (a) Is there a periodical report of shortages/excess?
       (b) If so, are these differences investigated?
       (c) Are these differences adjusted in the stock records and in the financial

               accounts?
       (d) Is written approval obtained from a responsible official to adjust these

               differences?
(10) Are there norms for stock levels to be held?
D. Fixed Assets
(1) Are budgets for capital expenditure approved?
(2) Is the authority to incur capital expenditure restricted to specified officials?
(3) Are purchases of capital expenditure subject to same controls as applicable

       to purchases of raw materials, stores etc.?
(4) Is there proper check to see that amounts expended do not exceed the

       amount authorized?
(5) Are fixed assets verified periodically?
(6) Is there a written procedure for such verification?
(7) Are reports prepared on such verification?
(8) Do such reports indicate damaged/obsolete items of fixed assets?
(9) Are discrepancies disclosed by such reports investigated?
(10) Are the records and financial accounts corrected with appropriate authority?

Note: The Internal Control questionnaire is usually issued to the client and the
client is requested to get it filled by the concerned executives and employees by
giving replies as Yes/No/Not applicable along with explanatory notes, if any.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.51

6.2(D) Flow Chart

It is a graphic presentation of each part of the company's system of internal control.
A flow chart is considered to be the most concise way of recording the auditor's
review of the system. It minimises the amount of narrative explanation and thereby
achieves a consideration or presentation not possible in any other form.

It gives bird's eye view of the system and the flow of transactions and integration
and in documentation, can be easily spotted and improvements can be suggested. It
is also necessary for the auditor to study the significant features of the business
carried on by the concern, the nature of its activities and various channels of goods
and materials as well as cash, both inward and outward and also a comprehensive
study of the entire process of manufacturing, trading and administration. This will
help him to understand and evaluate the internal controls in the correct perspective.

ILLUSTRATION 11

In order to evaluate the Internal Control of Your and My Limited, a team member of
the auditors used a method according to which, number of questions relating to
internal control of the company were required to be answered by the employees of
the company. After obtaining the answers there was a discussion relating to those
answers between team member of the auditor and employees of the company for a
clear picture. State the method of evaluation of internal control as discussed above.

SOLUTION

The method of evaluation of internal control used in the above question is known
as Internal Control Questionnaire because in questionnaire method, a number of
questions relating to internal control of a company are required to be answered by
employees of that company and when answers to the questions are obtained, there
is a discussion relating to those answers between team members of the auditors
and employees of that company for a clear picture.

ILLUSTRATION 12

Healthy and Useful Limited is into small manufacturing as well as trading business.
For the purpose of evaluating the internal control of Healthy and Useful Limited, a
team member of the auditors of the company used a method according to which
the whole description of internal control that was operating in the said company
was to be recorded. Identify the method of evaluation of internal control as
mentioned above.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.52  AUDITING AND ETHICS

SOLUTION

The method of evaluation of internal control referred above is known as Narrative
Record because in Narrative Record method, a whole description of internal control
operating in an entity is recorded. Narrative Record method is also appropriate for
small manufacturing as well as trading business as is mentioned in the question
above case.

    7. TESTING OF INTERNAL CONTROL

After assimilating the internal control system, the auditor needs to examine
whether and how far the same is actually in operation. For this, he resorts to actual
testing of the system in operation. This he does on a selective basis: he can plan
this testing in such a manner that all the important areas are covered in a period
of, say, three years.

Test of controls are performed to obtain audit evidence about the effectiveness of
the:-

(i) Design of the accounting and internal control system

(ii) Operation of the internal control throughout the period

Test of controls include tests of elements of the control environment where
strengths in the control environment are used by auditors to reduce control risk.
Some of the procedures performed to obtain the understanding of the accounting
and internal control systems may not have been specifically planned as tests of
control but may provide audit evidence about the effectiveness of the design and
operation of internal controls relevant to certain assertions and, consequently,
serve as tests of control. For example, in obtaining the understanding of the
accounting and internal control systems pertaining to cash, the auditor may have
obtained audit evidence about the effectiveness of the bank reconciliation process
through inquiry and observation. When the auditor concludes that procedures
performed to obtain the understanding of the accounting and internal control
systems also provide audit evidence about the suitability of design and operating
effectiveness of policies and procedures relevant to a particular financial statement
assertion, the auditor may use that audit evidence, provided it is sufficient to
support a control risk assessment at less than a high level.

Test of controls may include:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL  3.53

 Inspection of documents supporting transactions and other events to gain
       audit evidence that internal controls have operated properly, for example,
       verifying that a transaction has been authorised.

 Inquiries about, and observation of, internal controls which leave no audit
       trail, for example, determining who actually performs each function and not
       merely who is supposed to perform it.

 Re-performance involves the auditor's independent execution of procedures
       or controls that were originally performed as part of the entity's internal
       control, for example, reconciliation of bank accounts, to ensure they were
       correctly performed by the entity.

 Testing of internal control operating on specific computerised applications or
       over the overall information technology function, for example, access or
       program change controls.

While obtaining audit evidence about the effective operation of internal controls,
the auditor considers how they were applied, the consistency with which they were
applied during the period and by whom they were applied. The concept of effective
operation recognises that some deviations may have occurred. Deviations from
prescribed controls may be caused by such factors as changes in key personnel,
significant seasonal fluctuations in volume of transactions and human error. When
deviations are detected, the auditor makes specific inquiries regarding these
matters, particularly, the timing of staff changes in key internal control functions.
The auditor then ensures that the tests of control appropriately cover such a period
of change or fluctuation.

Based on the results of the tests of control, the auditor should evaluate whether
the internal controls are designed and operating as contemplated in the
preliminary assessment of control risk. The evaluation of deviations may result in
the auditor concluding that the assessed level of control risk needs to be revised.
In such cases, the auditor would modify the nature, timing and extent of planned
substantive procedures.

Before the conclusion of the audit, based on the results of substantive procedures
and other audit evidence obtained by the auditor, the auditor should consider
whether the assessment of control risk is confirmed. In case of deviations from the
prescribed accounting and internal control systems, the auditor would make
specific inquiries to consider their implications. Where, on the basis of such

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.54  AUDITING AND ETHICS

inquiries, the auditor concludes that the deviations are such that the preliminary
assessment of control risk is not supported, he would amend the same unless the
audit evidence obtained from other tests of control supports that assessment.
Where the auditor concludes that the assessed level of control risk needs to be
revised, he would modify the nature, timing and extent of his planned substantive
procedures.

    8. WHAT IS AN AUTOMATED ENVIRONMENT?

An automated environment basically refers to a business environment where the
processes, operations, accounting and even decisions are carried out by using
computer systems ­ also known as Information Systems (IS) or Information
Technology (IT) systems. Nowadays, it is very common to see computer systems
being used in almost every type of business.

8.1 Key features of an automated environment

The fundamental principle of an automated environment is the ability to carry out
business with less manual intervention and more system driven. The complexity of
a business environment depends on the level of automation i.e., if a business
environment is more automated, it is likely to be more complex. Key features of an
automated environment are as under: -

 Enables faster business operation
 Accuracy in data processing and computation
 Ability to process large volume of transactions
 Integration amongst business operations
 Better security and controls
 Less prone to human errors
 Provides latest information
 Connectivity and networking capability

If a company uses an integrated enterprise resource planning system (ERP) viz.,
SAP, Oracle etc., then it is considered more complex to audit. On the other hand, if
a company is using an off-the-shelf accounting software, then it is likely to be less
automated and hence less complex environment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.55

8.2 Understanding and documenting automated
      environment

In an audit of financial statements, an auditor is required to understand the entity
and its business, including IT. Understanding the entity and its automated
environment involves understanding how IT department is organised, IT activities,
the IT dependencies, relevant risks and controls. Given below are some of the points
that an auditor should consider to obtain an understanding of the company's
automated environment:

 Information systems being used (one or more application systems and what
       they are)

 Their purpose (financial and non-financial)
 Location of IT systems - local vs global
 Architecture (desktop based, client-server, web application, cloud based)
 Version (functions and risks could vary in different versions of same

       application).
 Interfaces within systems (in case multiple systems exist).
 In-house vs Packaged.
 Outsourced activities (IT maintenance and support).
 Key persons (CIO, CISO, Administrators).

The understanding of a company's IT environment that is obtained should be
documented.

8.3 Risks arising from use of IT Systems

Having obtained an understanding of the IT systems and the automated environment
of a company, the auditor should now understand the risks that arise from the use
of IT systems. Given below are some such risks that should be considered:

 Inaccurate processing of data, processing inaccurate data, or both.
 Unauthorized access to data.
 Direct data changes (backend changes).
 Excessive access / Privileged access (super users).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.56  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 Lack of adequate segregation of duties.
 Unauthorized changes to systems or programs.
 Failure to make necessary changes to systems or programs.
 Loss of data.

8.4 Impact of IT related risks

The above risks have to be mitigated. If not mitigated, such risks, could have an
impact on audit in different ways discussed as under: -
Impact on substantive checking
Inability to address above discussed risks may lead to non-reliance of data obtained
from systems. In such a case, all information, data, and reports would have to be
tested thoroughly for their completeness and accuracy. It could lead to increased
substantive checking i.e., detailed checking.
Impact on controls
It can lead to non-reliance on automated controls, system calculations and
accounting procedures built into applications. It may result in additional audit work.
Impact on reporting
Due to regulatory requirements in respect of internal financial controls (discussed
in subsequent paras) in case of companies, it may lead to modification of auditor's
report in some instances.

8.5 Types of Controls in an automated environment

Controls in an automated environment can be categorized as under: -
(A) General IT controls
(B) Application controls
(C) IT-dependent controls

8.5(A) General IT controls

General IT controls are policies and procedures that relate to many applications
and support the effective functioning of application controls. General IT-controls

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.57

that maintain the integrity of information and security of data commonly include
controls over the following:

 Data centre and network operations

 Program change

 Access security

 Application system acquisition, development, and maintenance (Business
       Applications)

These are IT controls generally implemented to mitigate the IT specific risks and
applied commonly across multiple IT systems, applications and business processes.
Hence, General IT controls are known as "pervasive" controls or "indirect" controls.

(a) Controls over Data centre and network operations

The objective of controls over Data centre and network operations is to ensure that
production systems are processed to meet financial reporting objectives. These
include activities such as overall management of computer operation activities,
preparing, scheduling and executing of batch jobs, monitoring, storage and
retention of backups. Such controls also help in performance monitoring of
operating system, database and networks. Matters such as BCP (Business continuity
plan) and DRP (Disaster recovery plan) which deal with recovery from failures are
also taken care of by such type of controls.

(b) Program Change

The objective of program change controls is to ensure that modified systems
continue to meet financial reporting objectives. It includes activities such as change
management process, recording, managing and tracking change requests, making
and testing changes etc.

(c) Access Security

The objective of controls over access security is to ensure that access to programs
and data is authenticated and authorized to meet financial reporting objectives. It
includes activities such as security organization & management, security policies &
procedures, application security, data security, operating system security, network
security, physical security etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.58  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(d) Application system acquisition, development, and maintenance

The objective of such controls is to ensure that systems are developed, configured
and implemented to meet financial reporting objectives. It includes overall
management of development activities, project initiation, analysis & design,
construction, testing & quality assurance etc.

8.5(B) Application Controls

Application controls include both automated or manual controls that operate at a
business process level. Automated Application controls are embedded into IT
applications viz., ERPs and help in ensuring the completeness, accuracy and
integrity of data in those systems. Examples of automated applications include edit
checks and validation of input data, sequence number checks, user limit checks,
reasonableness checks, mandatory data fields.

8.5(C) IT dependent Controls

IT dependent controls are basically manual controls that make use of some form of
data or information or report produced from IT systems and applications. In this
case, even though the control is performed manually, the design and effectiveness
of such controls depends on the reliability of source data. Due to the inherent
dependency on IT, the effectiveness and reliability of automated application
controls and IT dependent controls require the General IT controls to be effective.

8.6 General IT Controls vs. Application Controls

 These two categories of control over IT systems are interrelated.

 The relationship between the application controls and the General IT Controls
       is such that General IT Controls are needed to support the functioning of
       application controls, and both are needed to ensure complete and accurate
       information processing through IT systems.

8.7 Testing methods in an automated environment

Having learnt about the various IT risks and controls, let us understand the different
ways testing is performed in an automated environment. There are basically four
types of audit tests that should be used. These are inquiry, observation, inspection
and reperformance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.59

Inquiry is the most efficient audit test but it also gives the least audit evidence.
Hence, inquiry should always be used in combination with any one of the other
audit testing methods. Inquiry alone is not sufficient. Reperformance is most
effective as an audit test and gives the best audit evidence. However, testing by
reperformance could be very time consuming and least efficient most of the time.

Generally, applying inquiry in combination with inspection gives the most effective
and efficient audit evidence. However, which audit test to use, when and in what
combination is a matter of professional judgement and will vary depending on
several factors including risk assessment, control environment, desired level of
evidence required, history of errors/misstatements, complexity of business,
assertions being addressed etc. The auditor should document the nature of test (or
combination of tests) applied along with the judgements in the audit file.

When testing in an automated environment, some of the more common methods
are as follows:

 Obtain an understanding of how an automated transaction is processed by
       doing a walkthrough of one end-to-end transaction using a combination of
       inquiry, observation and inspection.

 Observe how a user processes transactions under different scenarios.

 Inspect the configuration defined in an application.

Where the general IT controls are not existing or existing but ineffective, the auditor
should assess the impact of IT risks and complexity of the automated environment
in which the business operations take place and plan alternative audit procedures
in order to rely on the system-based information.

    9. CHARACTERISTICS OF MANUAL AND
          AUTOMATED ELEMENTS OF INTERNAL
          CONTROL RELEVANT TO THE AUDITOR'S
          RISK ASSESSMENT

An entity's system of internal control contains manual elements and often contains
automated elements. The characteristics of manual or automated elements are
relevant to the auditor's risk assessment and further audit procedures based
thereon. The use of manual or automated elements in internal control also affects

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.60  AUDITING AND ETHICS

the manner in which transactions are initiated, recorded, processed, and reported:

(a) Controls in a manual system may include such procedures as approvals and
       reviews of transactions, and reconciliations and follow-up of reconciling
       items. Alternatively, an entity may use automated procedures to initiate,
       record, process, and report transactions, in which case records in electronic
       format replace paper documents.

(b) Controls in IT systems consist of a combination of automated controls (for
       example, controls embedded in computer programs) and manual controls.
       Further, manual controls may be independent of IT, may use information
       produced by IT, or may be limited to monitoring the effective functioning of
       IT and of automated controls, and to handling exceptions.

9.1 Manual elements vs automated elements in entity's
      internal control

Manual elements in internal control may be more suitable where judgment and
discretion are required such as for the following circumstances:

 Large, unusual or non-recurring transactions.

 Circumstances where errors are difficult to define, anticipate or predict.

 In changing circumstances that require a control response outside the scope of
       an existing automated control.

 In monitoring the effectiveness of automated controls.

Manual elements in internal control may be less reliable than automated elements
because they can be more easily bypassed, ignored, or overridden and they are
also more prone to simple errors and mistakes. Consistency of application of a
manual control element cannot therefore be assumed. Manual control elements
may be less suitable for the following circumstances:

 High volume or recurring transactions, or in situations where errors that can
       be anticipated or predicted can be prevented, or detected and corrected, by
       control parameters that are automated.

 Control activities where the specific ways to perform the control can be
       adequately designed and automated.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL  3.61

The extent and nature of the risks to internal control vary depending on the nature
and characteristics of the entity's information system. The entity responds to the
risks arising from the use of IT or from use of manual elements in internal control
by establishing effective controls in light of the characteristics of the entity's
information system.

10. AUDIT APPROACH IN AN AUTOMATED
      ENVIRONMENT

    11. DATA ANALYTICS FOR AUDIT

In today's digital age when companies rely on more and more on IT systems and
networks to operate business, the amount of data and information that exists in
these systems is enormous. The combination of processes, tools and techniques
that are used to tap vast amounts of electronic data to obtain meaningful
information is called data analytics. While it is true that companies can benefit
immensely from the use of data analytics in terms of increased profitability, better
customer service, gaining competitive advantage, more efficient operations, etc.,
even auditors can make use of similar tools and techniques in the audit process
and obtain good results.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.62  AUDITING AND ETHICS

The tools and techniques that auditors use in applying the principles of data
analytics are known as Computer Assisted Auditing Techniques or CAATs in short.
Data analytics can be used in testing of electronic records and data residing in IT
systems using spreadsheets and specialised audit tools viz., IDEA and ACL to
perform the following:

 Check completeness of data and population that is used in either test of
       controls or substantive audit tests.

 Selection of audit samples ­ random sampling, systematic sampling.

 Re-computation of balances ­ reconstruction of trial balance from transaction
       data.

 Reperformance of mathematical calculations ­ depreciation, bank interest
       calculation.

 Analysis of journal entries

 Fraud investigation.

 Evaluating impact of control deficiencies.

    12. DIGITAL AUDIT

Entities are embracing digitization as part of their operations to keep pace with
changing times. New technologies are helping companies revamp their
operations and rethink the way business is conducted. Companies are
restructuring their business models driven by technology. Automation is key to
digitization.

In such a business environment, use of digital technology is being made by
auditors right from planning to expression of final opinion. Auditors are making
use of artificial intelligence, data analytics and other latest technologies to help
understand business processes in a better way. By using such tools, auditors can
conduct audit in a better way and devote more attention to areas requiring
greater focus. Digital audit is helping auditors to better identify risks making use
of technology.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.63

     13. INTERNAL FINANCIAL CONTROLS AS PER
           REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS

The term Internal Financial Controls (IFC) basically refers to the policies and
procedures put in place by companies for ensuring:

 Reliability of financial reporting
 Effectiveness and efficiency of operations
 Compliance with applicable laws and regulations
 Safeguarding of assets
 Prevention and detection of frauds

The Companies Act, 2013 has placed a greater emphasis on the effective
implementation and reporting on the internal controls for a company. The term
"internal financial controls" is used at some places in the Companies Act, 2013
casting responsibilities as under: -

Relevant provision of Nature of Responsibility

the       Companies

Act,2013

Section 134 (5)(e)        In case of listed Companies, the Directors'
                          responsibility statement shall state that the Directors
                          had laid down Internal financial controls to be followed
                          by the company and that such Internal financial
                          controls are adequate and were operating effectively.

Section 143(3)(i) of the  The auditor's report shall state whether the company
Act                       has adequate Internal financial controls system in
                          place and also on the operating effectiveness of such
                          controls.

                          This requirement shall not apply to a private company
                          which ­

                          (i) is One Person Company or a small company; or

                          (ii) has turnover less than  50 crore as per latest
                                 audited Financial Statements; and which has
                                 aggregate borrowings from banks or financial
                                 institutions or any body corporate at any point

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         3.64             AUDITING AND ETHICS

                          of time during the financial Year for less than 
                          25 crore.

Section 177(4)(vii) of Every audit Committee shall act in accordance with the

the Act                   terms of reference specified in writing by the Board

                          which shall, inter alia, include - evaluation of internal

                          financial controls and risk management systems.

As per Section 149(8) of  The company and independent directors shall abide by
the Act                   the provisions specified in Schedule IV which lays
                          down the Code for independent Directors. As per this
                          code, the role and functions of independent directors
                          include that they shall satisfy themselves on the
                          integrity of financial information and that financial
                          controls and the systems of risk management are
                          robust and defensible.

The directors and management have primary responsibility of implementing and
maintaining an effective internal controls framework and auditors are expected to
evaluate, validate and report on the design and operating effectiveness of internal
financial controls.

    14. DOCUMENTING THE RISKS

The auditor shall document:

(a) The discussion among the engagement team and the significant decisions
       reached

(b) Key elements of the understanding obtained regarding each of the aspects
       of the entity and its environment and of each of the internal control
       components, the sources of information from which the understanding was
       obtained; and the risk assessment procedures performed

(c) The identified and assessed risks of material misstatement at the financial
       statement level and at the assertion level and

(d) The risks identified, and related controls about which the auditor has
       obtained an understanding.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.65

    15. ASSESS AND REPORT AUDIT FINDINGS

At the conclusion of each audit, it is possible that there will be certain findings or
exceptions in IT environment and IT controls of the company that need to be
assessed and reported to relevant stakeholders including management and those
charged with governance viz., Board of directors, Audit committee .

Some points to consider are as follows:

 Are there any weaknesses in IT controls?

 What is the impact of these weaknesses on overall audit?

 Report deficiencies to management ­ Internal controls memo or
       Management letter.

 Communicate in writing any significant deficiencies to those Charged with
       governance.

The auditor needs to assess each finding or exception to determine impact on the
audit and evaluate if the exception results in a deficiency in internal control.

A deficiency in internal control exists if a control is designed, implemented or
operated in such a way that it is unable to prevent, or detect and correct,
misstatements in the financial statements on a timely basis; or the control is
missing. Evaluation and assessment of audit findings and control deficiencies
involves applying professional judgement that include considerations for
quantitative and qualitative measures. Each finding should be looked at individually
and in the aggregate by combining with other findings/deficiencies.

    16. THE AUDITOR'S RESPONSES TO ASSESSED
          RISKS

SA 330- The auditor's responses to assessed risks deals with the auditor's
responsibility to design and implement responses to the risks of material
misstatement identified and assessed by the auditor in accordance with SA 315,
"Identifying and Assessing Risks of Material Misstatement Through Understanding
the Entity and Its Environment" in a financial statement audit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.66  AUDITING AND ETHICS

The objective of the auditor is to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence about
the assessed risks of material misstatement, through designing and implementing
appropriate responses to those risks.

SA 330 states that: -

(a) The auditor shall design and implement overall responses to address the
       assessed risks of material misstatement at the financial statement level.

(b) The auditor shall design and perform further audit procedures whose nature,
       timing and extent are based on and are responsive to the assessed risks of
       material misstatement at the assertion level.

In designing the further audit procedures to be performed, the auditor shall:

(a) Consider the reasons for the assessment given to the risk of material
       misstatement at the assertion level for each class of transactions, account
       balance, and disclosure, including:

       (i) The likelihood of material misstatement due to the particular
               characteristics of the relevant class of transactions, account balance, or
               disclosure (i.e., the inherent risk); and

       (ii) Whether the risk assessment takes into account the relevant controls
               (i.e., the control risk), thereby requiring the auditor to obtain audit
               evidence to determine whether the controls are operating effectively
               (i.e., the auditor intends to rely on the operating effectiveness of
               controls in determining the nature, timing and extent of substantive
               procedures); and

(b) Obtain more persuasive audit evidence the higher the auditor's assessment
       of risk.

The auditor shall design and perform tests of controls to obtain sufficient
appropriate audit evidence as to the operating effectiveness of relevant
controls when:

(a) The auditor's assessment of risks of material misstatement at the assertion
       level includes an expectation that the controls are operating effectively (i.e.,
       the auditor intends to rely on the operating effectiveness of controls in
       determining the nature, timing and extent of substantive procedures); or

(b) Substantive procedures alone cannot provide sufficient appropriate audit
       evidence at the assertion level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.67

In designing and performing tests of controls, the auditor shall obtain more
persuasive audit evidence the greater the reliance the auditor places on the
effectiveness of a control.

A higher level of assurance may be sought about the operating effectiveness of
controls when the approach adopted consists primarily of tests of controls, in
particular, where it is not possible or practicable to obtain sufficient appropriate
audit evidence only from substantive procedures.

16.1 Nature and Extent of Test of Controls

In designing and performing test of controls, the auditor shall:

(a) Perform other audit procedures in combination with inquiry to obtain audit
       evidence about the operating effectiveness of the controls, including:

       (i) How the controls were applied at relevant times during the period
               under audit.

       (ii) The consistency with which they were applied.

       (iii) By whom or by what means they were applied.

(b) Determine whether the controls to be tested depend upon other controls
       (indirect controls), and if so, whether it is necessary to obtain audit evidence
       supporting the effective operation of those indirect controls.

Inquiry alone is not sufficient to test the operating effectiveness of controls.
Accordingly, other audit procedures are performed in combination with inquiry.
In this regard, inquiry combined with inspection or reperformance may provide
more assurance than inquiry and observation, since an observation is pertinent
only at the point in time at which it is made.

The nature of the particular control influences the type of procedure required to
obtain audit evidence about whether the control was operating effectively.

For example, if operating effectiveness is evidenced by documentation, the
auditor may decide to inspect it to obtain audit evidence about operating
effectiveness.

When more persuasive audit evidence is needed regarding the effectiveness of a
control, it may be appropriate to increase the extent of testing of the control as
well as the degree of reliance on controls.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.68  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Matters the auditor may consider in determining the extent of test of controls
include the following:

 The frequency of the performance of the control by the entity during the
       period.

 The length of time during the audit period that the auditor is relying on the
       operating effectiveness of the control.

 The expected rate of deviation from a control.

 The relevance and reliability of the audit evidence to be obtained regarding
       the operating effectiveness of the control at the assertion level.

 The extent to which audit evidence is obtained from tests of other controls
       related to the assertion.

16.2 Timing of Test of Controls

The auditor shall test controls for the particular time, or throughout the period, for
which the auditor intends to rely on those controls in order to provide an
appropriate basis for the auditor's intended reliance. Audit evidence pertaining
only to a point in time may be sufficient for the auditor's purpose, for example,
when testing controls over the entity's physical inventory counting at the period
end. If, on the other hand, the auditor intends to rely on a control over a period,
tests that are capable of providing audit evidence that the control operated
effectively at relevant times during that period are appropriate. Such tests may
include tests of the entity's monitoring of controls.

16.3 Using Audit Evidence Obtained in Previous Audits

In determining whether it is appropriate to use audit evidence about the operating
effectiveness of controls obtained in previous audits, and, if so, the length of the
time period that may elapse before retesting a control, the auditor shall consider
the following:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.69

(a) The effectiveness of other elements of internal control, including the control
       environment, the entity's monitoring of controls, and the entity's risk
       assessment process

(b) The risks arising from the characteristics of the control, including whether it
       is manual or automated

(c) The effectiveness of general IT-controls

(d) The effectiveness of the control and its application by the entity, including
       the nature and extent of deviations in the application of the control noted in
       previous audits, and whether there have been personnel changes that
       significantly affect the application of the control

(e) Whether the lack of a change in a particular control poses a risk due to
       changing circumstances and

(f) The risks of material misstatement and the extent of reliance on the control

If the auditor plans to use audit evidence from a previous audit about the operating
effectiveness of specific controls, the auditor shall establish the continuing
relevance of that evidence by obtaining audit evidence about whether significant
changes in those controls have occurred subsequent to the previous audit.

16.4 Evaluating the Operating Effectiveness of Controls

When evaluating the operating effectiveness of relevant controls, the auditor shall
evaluate whether misstatements that have been detected by substantive
procedures indicate that controls are not operating effectively. The absence of
misstatements detected by substantive procedures, however, does not provide
audit evidence that controls related to the assertion being tested are effective. A
material misstatement detected by the auditor's procedures is a strong indicator of
the existence of a significant deficiency in internal control.

16.5 Specific inquiries by auditor when deviations from
      controls are detected

When deviations from controls upon which the auditor intends to rely are detected,
the auditor shall make specific inquiries to understand these matters and their

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.70  AUDITING AND ETHICS

potential consequences, and shall determine whether:

(a) The test of controls that have been performed provide an appropriate basis
       for reliance on the controls

(b) Additional test of controls are necessary or

(c) The potential risks of misstatement need to be addressed using substantive
       procedures.

Irrespective of the assessed risks of material misstatement, the auditor shall design
and perform substantive procedures for each material class of transactions, account
balance, and disclosure.

This requirement reflects the facts that:

(i) the auditor's assessment of risk is judgmental and so may not identify all risks
       of material misstatement and

(ii) there are inherent limitations to internal control, including management
       override.

Substantive procedures are audit procedures designed to detect material
misstatements at the assertion level. Substantive procedures comprise: (i) Tests of
details (of classes of transactions, account balances, and disclosures), and (ii)
Substantive analytical procedures.

16.6 Tests of Details

Tests of details are further classified into tests of transactions i.e., vouching and
tests of balances i.e., verification.

For example, a purchase transaction may be verified by examining the related
purchase invoice, goods received note, inward gate entry register. Such tests of
transactions help in establishing the authenticity of transactions recorded in books
of accounts.

Tests of balances consist of verification of assets as well as liabilities. Verification of
an item of fixed asset, for example, would help in establishing existence of that
asset as on date of balance sheet. This may be obtained by reviewing entity's plan
for performing physical verification of fixed assets and obtaining evidence for
performance of physical verification of fixed assets by management.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.71

16.7 Substantive analytical procedures

Substantive analytical procedures refer to analytical procedures used as substantive
procedures by auditor. The term "analytical procedures" means evaluations of
financial information through analysis of plausible relationships among both
financial and non-financial data. Analytical procedures also encompass such
investigation as is necessary of identified fluctuations or relationships that are
inconsistent with other relevant information or that differ from expected values by
a significant amount.

The use of widely recognised ratios (such as profit margins for different types of
retail entities) can often be used effectively in substantive analytical procedures to
provide evidence to support the reasonableness of recorded amounts.

Analytical procedures involving, for example, the prediction of total rental income
on a building divided into apartments, taking the rental rates, the number of
apartments and vacancy rates into consideration, can provide persuasive evidence
and may eliminate the need for further verification by means of tests of details.

Substantive analytical procedures are generally more applicable to large volumes
of transactions that tend to be predictable over time.

16.7.1 Nature and extent of Substantive procedures

Depending on the circumstances, the auditor may determine that:

· Performing only substantive analytical procedures will be sufficient to reduce
       audit risk to an acceptably low level. For example, where the auditor's
       assessment of risk is supported by audit evidence from tests of controls.

· Only tests of details are appropriate.

· A combination of substantive analytical procedures and tests of details are
       most responsive to the assessed risks.

Because the assessment of the risk of material misstatement takes account of
internal control, the extent of substantive procedures may need to be increased
when the results from test of controls are unsatisfactory.

In designing tests of details, the extent of testing is ordinarily thought of in terms
of the sample size. However, other matters are also relevant, including whether it
is more effective to use other selective means of testing.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.72          AUDITING AND ETHICS

               Auditor's responses
                  to assessed risks

      Tests of Controls                            Substantive
                                                   Procedures

      Tests of Details                                   Substantive
                                                   analytical procedures

  Tests of    Tests of balances
transactions   i.e.verification
i.e.vouching

Test Your Understanding 9

Zomba Products Private limited is a small company. The control systems in the
company are rudimentary. How, you as an auditor of the company, would proceed
to evaluate internal control of the company?

Test Your Understanding 10

A Chartered accountant during course of audit of a company finds that cash is not
deposited into bank frequently although concerned staff of company was required
to do so. Further, the official responsible for ensuring performance of above
function, has also not paid any attention to it. Discuss what does it represent from
auditor's perspective.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.73

CASE STUDY-1

CA Paritosh is auditor of a company. The financial statements of the company have
just been received for audit. Following issues have been flagged pertaining to the
financial statements of the company for purpose of risk assessment: -
(i) The revenue of company has fallen from ` 50 crore in last year to ` 5 crore in

       current year (for which financial statements have been received for audit) due
       to lack of demand in the market for company's products.
(ii) Due to advent of new products in the market, company's products are fast
       becoming outdated.
(iii) A large customer having an outstanding balance of ` 5 crore has failed to pay
       to the company despite efforts made by the company.
(iv) Inventory holding period has increased from 30 days in last year to 90 days.
(v) The company also gets carried out job operations from third parties.
       Therefore, parts of inventories are lying with third parties.

Based on above, answer the following questions: -

1. Regarding drastic fall in revenue of the company, which of the following is an
       audit risk?

       (a) Fall in revenue would result in fall of profits for the company.

       (b) Drastic fall in revenue may imply that company is not able to carry out
               its operations in foreseeable future due to lack of demand in the market
               for company's products. There is a risk that going concern disclosure is
               omitted to be made in financial statements.

       (c) The company can explore some new line of activity, if demand of its
               products is falling.

       (d) Fall in revenue would mean lower tax liabilities for the company.

2. The company's products are getting outdated in the market. Which of the
       following is an audit risk?

       (a) The company should devise strategies to sell products in the market.

       (b) Inventories may be understated in such a scenario.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        3.74    AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (c) Inventories may be overstated in such a scenario.

       (d) The company should launch a 1+1 free offer for its customers.

3. A large customer has failed to pay to the company. Identify audit risk from
       below:

       (a) Receivables may be misstated if irrecoverable debt is not written off.

       (b) Receivables may be overstated if irrecoverable debt is not written off.

       (c) Writing off irrecoverable debt would impact profits of company adversely.

       (d) Failure to recover outstanding debt would impact cash flows of company
               adversely.

4. Identify audit risk involved when inventory holding period has increased from
       30 days to 90 days.

       (a) There is a risk of overstatement of inventories.

       (b) There is a risk relating to existence of inventories.

       (c) There is a risk that slow movement of stocks would increase tax liability
               when GST rates are increased.

       (d) There is a risk relating to holding and storage cost of inventories.

5. Part of inventories are lying with third parties. Identify audit risk involved.

       (a) There is a risk that third parties do not manufacture according to
               specifications of the company.

       (b) There is a risk that by getting job work done from third parties, company
               is increasing its costs.

       (c) There is a risk that sufficient and appropriate evidence would not be
               available in respect of quantity and condition of inventories lying with
               third parties.

       (d) There is a risk that sufficient and appropriate evidence would not be
               available for quality control in respect of inventories lying with third
               parties.

Answers to Questions involving Case Study 1

1. (b)  2. (c)  3. (b)                             4. (a)  5. (c)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.75

CASE STUDY-2

CA Piyush is understanding internal controls as part of audit exercise of a company.
It is a new client. He has studied controls in place in various operational areas of
the company. After studying and gaining an understanding of such controls, he has
decided to test few controls to actually see whether these are operating as intended
by the management.

Till now, he has studied controls over inventories and bank. Few of such controls
are listed below: -

Nature of Control         Control description

Control over inventories  Inventories of the company lying at each location
                          should be insured.

Control over inventories  There should be inventory counts on a regular
                          basis for each location of the company.

Control over Bank operations Bank reconciliations are to be performed at
                                           regular intervals.

Based on above, answer the following questions: -

1. Which of the following most appropriately describes test of control regarding
       insurance of inventories?

       (a) Inspect insurance policies to verify that inventories at each location are
               insured for fire and burglary. The sum insured and period of validity of
               policy are not relevant.

       (b) Inspect insurance policies to verify that inventories at each location are
               comprehensively insured. Ensure adequacy of sum insured by comparing
               it with value of inventories. Also ensure policy period has not expired.

       (c) Inspect insurance policies to verify that inventories at each location are
               comprehensively insured. Ensure policy period has not expired.

       (d) Inspect insurance policies to verify that inventories at each location are
               insured for fire and burglary. Ensure policy period has not expired.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.76  AUDITING AND ETHICS

2. Which of the following most appropriately describes test of control regarding
       inventory counts?

       (a) Obtain detail of inventory counting procedure and ensure that inventory
               count is carried out according to laid down procedure.

       (b) Obtain detail of inventory counting procedure and ensure that inventory
               count is carried out according to laid down procedure. Attend inventory
               count.

       (c) Obtain detail of inventory counting procedure and ensure that inventory
               count is carried out according to laid down procedure. Attend inventory
               count and perform test count.

       (d) Attend inventory count and perform test count.

3. While testing control over bank reconciliations, it has been noticed that bank
       reconciliations are not being performed at regular intervals. Identify the most
       appropriate description of "control deficiency" in this regard: -

       (a) Bank reconciliations are not being performed regularly as concerned staff
               is overburdened.

       (b) Bank reconciliations are not being performed regularly as concerned staff
               is overburdened. It could result in errors.

       (c) Bank reconciliations are not being performed regularly as concerned staff
               is overburdened. It could result in errors. It may result in misstatement of
               cash and bank balance in financial statements.

       (d) Bank reconciliations are not being performed regularly as concerned staff
               is overburdened. These should be performed monthly and reviewed by
               senior accountant.

4. Since the company is a new client, which of the following statements is most
       appropriate?

       (a) There is reduced detection risk.

       (b) There is increased detection risk.

       (c) There is no effect on detection risk.

       (d) Detection risk should be increased to lower audit risk.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL         3.77

5. Which of the following statements is most appropriate regarding auditor's
       response to assessed risk of a new client?
       (a) More substantive procedures would require to be performed.
       (b) Less substantive procedures would require to be performed.
       (c) There is no effect on substantive procedures.
       (d) There is no effect on substantive procedures as audit risk is low.

Answers to Questions involving case study 2

1. (b)  2. (c)  3. (c)  4. (b)               5. (a)

SUMMARY

 Audit risk means the risk that the auditor gives an inappropriate audit opinion
       when the financial statements are materially misstated. Audit risk is a function
       of the risks of material misstatement and detection risk.

 Risks of material misstatements consists of two components i.e., inherent risk
       and control risk.

 There is always a risk that before considering any existence of internal control
       in an entity, a particular transaction, balance of an account or a disclosure
       required to be made in the financial statements of an entity have a chance of
       being misstated and such misstatement can be material. This risk is known as
       inherent risk.

 Control risk is a risk that internal control existing and operating in an entity
       would not be efficient enough to stop from happening, or find and then
       rectify in an appropriate time, any material misstatement relating to a
       transaction, balance of an account or disclosure required to be made in the
       financial statements of that entity.

 Detection risk is the risk that the procedures performed by the auditor to
       reduce audit risk to an acceptably low level will not detect a misstatement
       that exists and that could be material, either individually or when aggregated
       with other misstatements. It comprises of sampling and non-sampling risk.

 The assessment of risks is a matter of professional judgment, rather than a
       matter capable of precise measurement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.78  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 Misstatements, including omissions, are considered to be material if they,
       individually or in the aggregate, could reasonably be expected to influence
       the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial
       statements.

 Performance materiality means the amount or amounts set by the auditor at
       less than materiality for the financial statements as a whole to reduce to an
       appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and
       undetected misstatements exceeds materiality for the financial statements as
       a whole.

 Obtaining an understanding of the entity and its environment, including the
       entity's internal control is a continuous, dynamic process of gathering,
       updating and analysing information throughout the audit.

 Internal control is the process designed, implemented and maintained by
       those charged with governance, management and other personnel to provide
       reasonable assurance about the achievement of an entity's objectives with
       regard to reliability of financial reporting, effectiveness and efficiency of
       operations, safeguarding of assets, and compliance with applicable laws and
       regulations.

 Significant risks often relate to significant nonroutine transactions or
       judgmental matters.

 A proper understanding of the internal control system in its content and
       working also enables an auditor to decide upon the appropriate audit
       procedure to be applied in different areas to be covered in the audit
       programme.

 Methods of evaluating internal control include narrative record, checklist,
       internal control questionnaire and flow chart.

 Test of controls are performed to obtain audit evidence about the
       effectiveness of the design of the accounting and internal control system and
       operation of the internal control throughout the period.

 The complexity of a business environment depends on the level of
       automation i.e., if a business environment is more automated, it is likely to be
       more complex.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.79

 Controls in an automated environment include general IT controls,
       application controls and IT-dependent controls.

 The combination of processes, tools and techniques that are used to tap vast
       amounts of electronic data to obtain meaningful information is called data
       analytics.

 The objective of the auditor is to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence
       about the assessed risks of material misstatement, through designing and
       implementing appropriate responses to those risks.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQs based Questions

1. Which of the following is true regarding materiality?
       (a) It is unaffected by nature of an item.
       (b) It is unaffected by requirements of law or regulations.
       (c) It is not a matter of professional judgment.
       (d) It is not always a matter of relative size.

2. The operations of a company are automated substantially. Which of the
       following statements is most appropriate in this respect?
       (a) It results in complex business environment.
       (b) It results in simple business environment and easier audit.
       (c) Automation has no relationship with complexity of business environment.
       (d) It results in simple business environment. However, it increases
               complexity of audit.

3. Who is responsible for maintaining effective internal financial controls?
       (a) Statutory auditor
       (b) Audit Committee
       (c) Management
       (d) Shareholders

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.80  AUDITING AND ETHICS

4. Which of the following is not a risk to a company's internal control due to its
       IT environment?
       (a) Potential loss of data
       (b) Inability to access data when required
       (c) Unauthorized access to data
       (d) Processing of large volumes of data

5. Which of the following is not an example of "General IT controls"?
       (a) Controls pertaining to Disaster recovery plan
       (b) Controls pertaining to batch preparation
       (c) Controls pertaining to data security
       (d) Controls pertaining to validation of input data in an application

Correct/Incorrect

State with reasons (in short) whether the following statements are
correct or incorrect:
(i) There is direct relationship between materiality and the degree of audit risk.
(ii) Control risk is the susceptibility of an account balance or class of transactions

       to misstatement that could be material either individually or, when aggregated
       with misstatements in other balances or classes, assuming that there were no
       related internal controls.
(iii) Tests of control are performed to obtain audit evidence about the effectiveness
       of Internal Controls Systems.
(iv) Maintenance of Internal Control System is the responsibility of the Statutory
       Auditor.

Theoretical Questions

1. Discuss how "analytical procedures" performed as "risk assessment procedures"
       can be useful to an auditor.

2. Is materiality required to be documented by the auditor? What factors have to
       be considered this regard?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL                     3.81

3. Discuss relationship between "General IT controls" and "application controls"
       in an automated environment.

4. A company functions in an automated environment. Discuss in what areas data
       analytics can be useful for auditor of the company.

5. What is understood by "non-routine" transactions? Briefly outline why risks of
       material misstatement is greater for such transactions.

6. The auditor shall obtain an understanding of the major activities that the entity
       uses to monitor internal control over financial reporting" Explain.

7. "Risk of material misstatement consists of two components" Explain clearly
       defining risk of material misstatement.

8. "The SAs do not ordinarily refer to inherent risk and control risk separately, but
       rather to a combined assessment of the "risks of material misstatement""
       Explain

9. "The auditor shall obtain an understanding of the control environment" Explain
       stating what is included in control environment.

10. Internal control over safeguarding of assets against unauthorised acquisition,
       use, or disposition may include controls relating to both financial reporting and
       operations objectives. Explain stating clearly the objectives of Internal Control.

ANSWERS/SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs based Questions

1. d  2. a  3. c                                   4. d  5. d

Answers to Correct/Incorrect

(i) Incorrect: There is an inverse relationship between materiality and the degree
       of audit risk. The higher the materiality level, the lower the audit risk and vice
       versa. For example, the risk that a particular account balance or class of
       transactions could be misstated by an extremely large amount might be very
       low but the risk that it could be misstated by an extremely small amount
       might be very high.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.82  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(ii) Incorrect: Inherent risk is the susceptibility of an account balance or class of
       transactions to misstatement that could be material either individually or,
       when aggregated with misstatements in other balances or classes, assuming
       that there were no related internal controls. Control risk, on the other hand
       is the risk that a misstatement that could occur in an assertion about a class of
       transaction, account balance or disclosure and that could be material, either
       individually or when aggregated with other misstatements, will not be
       prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis by the entity's internal
       control.

(iii) Correct: Tests of Control are performed to obtain audit evidence about the
       effectiveness of:

       (a) the design of the accounting and internal control systems that is
               whether, they are suitably designed to prevent or detect or correct
               material misstatements and

       (b) the operation of the internal controls throughout the period.

(iv) Incorrect: The management is responsible for maintaining an adequate
       accounting system incorporating various internal controls to the extent
       appropriate to the size and nature of the business. Maintenance of Internal
       Control System is responsibility of management because the internal control
       is the process designed, implemented and maintained by those charged with
       governance/management to provide reasonable assurance about the
       achievement of entity's objectives.

Answers to Theoretical Questions

1. Refer to heading on "What is included in risk assessment procedures" and
       gather usefulness of analytical procedures performed as risk assessment
       procedures.

2. Refer to heading on "documenting the materiality".

3. Refer to heading on "General IT controls vs. Application controls".

4. Refer to heading on "data analytics"

5. Refer to heading on "identifying significant risks".

6. Refer to heading on "Internal Control"

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.83

7. Refer to heading "Components of risk of material misstatement".

8. Refer to heading on "Combined Assessment of the Risk of Material
       Misstatement".

9. Refer to heading on "Internal Control".

10. Objectives of Internal Control

       Internal control over safeguarding of assets against unauthorised acquisition,
       use, or disposition may include controls relating to both financial reporting and
       operations objectives. The auditor's consideration of such controls is generally
       limited to those relevant to the reliability of financial reporting. For example,
       use of access controls, such as passwords, that limit access to the data and
       programs that process cash disbursements may be relevant to a financial
       statement audit. Conversely, safeguarding controls relating to operations
       objectives, such as controls to prevent the excessive use of materials in
       production, generally are not relevant to a financial statement audit.

       Objectives of Internal Control are :

       (i) transactions are executed in accordance with managements general or
               specific authorization;

       (ii) all transactions are promptly recorded in the correct amount in the
               appropriate accounts and in the accounting period in which executed
               so as to permit preparation of financial information within a framework
               of recognized accounting policies and practices and relevant statutory
               requirements, if any, and to maintain accountability for assets;

       (iii) assets are safeguarded from unauthorised access, use or disposition;
               and

       (iv) the recorded assets are compared with the existing assets at reasonable
               intervals and appropriate action is taken with regard to any differences.

Answers to Questions involving Test your Understanding

1. It has been stated that many companies engaged in providing holistic
       solutions to problem of stubble burning have not been successful. It shows
       that line of activity is inherently risky. Therefore, there is a greater possibility

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.84  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       of misstatements. The component of risks of material misstatement involved
       is "inherent risk."

2. The company has devised a control that its inventory of perishable goods is
       stored in appropriate conditions and responsibility is fixed on two persons to
       monitor environment using sensors and to report on deviations. There is a
       possibility that persons given responsibility do not perform their work and
       report deviations. The component of risks of material misstatement is "control
       risk".

3. There is a possibility that planned audit procedures may not achieve desired
       result and fail to detect misstatements in revenue recognition. The risk
       alluded to it is "detection risk".

4. Jo Jo Limited is planning to list on Bombay Stock Exchange next year. There
       is a greater chance of misstatements in the financial statements due to
       planned listing next year. There could be a possibility of intentional
       manipulation of financial statements so that good response is received to
       proposed issue. Therefore, there is increased audit risk i.e., risk of expressing
       inappropriate opinion by the auditor when financial statements are materially
       misstated.

5. It is noticed by the auditor that current ratio has improved from 1.20:1 (in
       preceding year) to 1.75:1 (in current year). The auditor is using "analytical
       procedures" as risk assessment procedures. Current ratio has improved from
       previous year. There could be a possibility of misstatement in current assets
       and current liabilities. It is possible that improvement in current ratio is
       artificial due to misstatements and has been done to secure good response
       to the proposed issue of company next year.

6. If there is any statutory requirement of disclosure, it is to be considered
       material. Schedule III mandates disclosure of nature of security in relation to
       loan. The amount involved is irrelevant.

7. The study of company policies and practices regarding employee recruitment,
       training, orientation and related matters including hiring of best candidates
       is part of understanding HR function of the company. It, in turn, helps in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
RISK ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL               3.85

       understanding control environment of the company. By gaining such a
       knowledge, she can better understand internal control of the company.

8. She is keen to find out whether there exists a proper system of segregation
       of duties in the company. She is gaining an understanding of internal control
       of the company. In particular, she is understanding "control activities". When
       a person recording a transaction is different from one authorizing it, she gains
       confidence that there exists a system for preventing misstatements. It helps
       her in gaining insight into the internal control system of the company.

9. In a small company, control systems are basic and not formalized. Therefore,
       auditor should proceed to evaluate internal control using narrative record.

10. Cash is not deposited into bank frequently, although, concerned staff of
       company was required to do so. Further, the official responsible for ensuring
       performance of above function, has also not paid any attention to it. It means
       that control is not working as planned. It would not be able to prevent
       misstatement and very purpose of control is defeated. It represents a "control
       deficiency".

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
