CHAPTER  1

NATURE, OBJECTIVE
AND SCOPE OF AUDIT

                                     LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand-

 Meaning, nature and scope of audit
 Objectives of audit
 Inherent Limitations of audit
 Benefits of audit
 Meaning of assurance engagements
 Difference between reasonable assurance engagement and

      limited assurance engagement

 Meaning and basic purpose of engagement and quality control

      standards

 Practicality of above concepts by studying through examples

      and case studies

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.2           AUDITING AND ETHICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

                                                   Meaning

     SA 200                                                 Objective &
                                                                Scope

 Audit with                                        AUDIT
reference to
                                                                          Need &
 Standards                                                                Benefits
on Auditing

               Inherent                                     Qualities of
              Limitations                                     Auditor

Sameer, a young CA aspirant, takes interest in events happening around him.
Business and financial dealings of corporate world interest him very much. He
regularly reads a newspaper publishing mainly business and economic news. He
also keeps track of particularly such news on social media handles.

During last one year or so, he has seen audited financial results of many companies
listed on stock exchanges being published in newspaper. He also visited web sites
of some companies to go through their annual reports. The annual reports also,
inter alia, contained audit reports signed by Chartered Accountants as auditors of
companies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.3

He was also eagerly tracking financial results of an IT company. The annual audited
results of the company were declared on one Friday evening. However, shares of
company took a beating on Monday as soon as markets opened. Curiosity led him
to find reason for such an adverse market reaction. He got to know that audited
profits of company were below market expectations and auditors had remarked
adversely on some matters which was not taken kindly by markets.

One of his uncles was expanding business and needed funds to meet business
expansion requirements. Anticipating urgent financial needs, he approached a
bank. Credit officer of bank requested for audited financial statements of past years
of business to consider his loan application.

He was also thinking that companies must be paying taxes on profits shown in their
audited financial statements. A few months back, he was reading a news report
pointing out substantial increase in direct tax collections of government as
highlighted in Union Budget.

Higher taxes paid by companies on basis of audited results may have been a
significant contributing factor of such increase in direct tax collections, he thought
in his mind. He was wondering upon enormous responsibility of auditors in this
regard. He kept on pondering over significant role of auditors in economy and
nation building.

    1. INTRODUCTION

What do such real-life situations highlight? Such instances underline importance of
auditing in today's complex business environment. Be it investors desirous of
investing their money in companies, shareholders anxious to know financial
position of companies they have invested in, banks or financial institutions willing
to lend funds to credit-worthy organizations, governments desirous of collecting
taxes from trade and industry in accordance with applicable laws, trade unions
negotiating with corporate managements for better wages or insurance companies
wanting to settle property claims caused by fire or other disasters- range of diverse
users in equally diverse fields rely upon audited financial statements.

Can you figure out reason behind such reliance? It is due to the fact that audited
financial statements provide confidence to users of financial statements; audited
financial statements provide assurance to users who may take their decisions on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.4  AUDITING AND ETHICS

the basis of such audited financial statements. Herein lies the importance of
auditing. You can very well understand how significant is role of auditing profession
and auditors in modern world involving multitude of economic activities being
carried out in equally dynamic legal and regulatory environments.

Here, comes a vital question. What do we mean by auditing? What is its nature and
scope? What it includes and What it does not? What are its limitations? We shall
try to find out answers to these questions in succeeding paras.

    2. ORIGIN OF AUDITING

Before we get to understand meaning and nature of auditing, let's travel back in
time to know about origin of auditing. Auditing has existed even in ancient times
in many societies of world including India. The reference to auditing is found in
Kautilya's Arthshastra even in 4th century BC. It talks about fixed accounting year, a
process for closure of accounts and audit for the same. Concepts of periodical
checking and verification existed even in those times. Even there are references in
his monumental work to misstatements in financial statements due to abuse of
power. Wasn't he far ahead of his times?

The word "audit" originates from Latin word "audire" meaning "to hear". In medieval
times, auditors used to hear the accounts read out to them to check that employees
were not careless and negligent. Industrial revolution in Europe led to astronomical
expansion in volume of trade and consequently demand of auditors.

Coming to more recent history, the first Auditor General of India was appointed in
British India in 1860 having both accounting and auditing functions. Later on, office
of Auditor General was given statutory recognition. Presently, Comptroller and
Auditor General of India is an independent constitutional authority responsible for
auditing government receipts and expenditures.

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India was established as a statutory body
under an Act of Parliament in 1949 for regulating the profession of Chartered
Accountancy in the country.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.5

    3. MEANING AND NATURE OF AUDITING

"An audit is an independent examination of financial information of any entity,
whether profit oriented or not, and irrespective of its size or legal form, when such an
examination is conducted with a view to expressing an opinion thereon".

An incisive analysis of above meaning of auditing brings out following points clearly: -

 Audit is an independent examination of financial information.

       Independence, here, implies that the judgement of a person is not subordinate
       to the wishes or direction of another person who might have engaged him.
       The auditor should be independent of entity whose financial statements are
       subject to audit so that he can form an opinion without being affected by any
       influence. Independence increases auditor's ability to act objectively without
       creeping in of any biases.

       Consider, for example, a person who requests his brother, a Chartered
       Accountant, to audit accounts of his proprietary concern and issue a report.
       Can CA audit accounts of concern in which his brother is sole proprietor? No,
       he cannot. It is due to the fact that there would be no independence in such
       a case due to relationship by birth between CA and his brother. He would be
       subject to influence from his brother.

       Take another case where a CA has invested in shares of a company. Can he
       audit accounts of such a company in which he holds shares? The answer is
       resounding NO. It is due to the fact that by holding shares of the company,
       his own self-interest gets involved. His own money is invested in the company
       and he may not be able to form judgment independently on the financial
       statements of the company.

 The entity whose financial information is examined need not necessarily be
       profit oriented like in case of a business. It can be a non-profit organization
       like an NGO or a charitable trust. Audit can be undertaken in respect of any
       organization be it a small, medium or large. Further, it can be conducted for
       any entity irrespective of its legal structure i.e. such an entity may be a
       proprietary concern, a partnership firm, a LLP, a private company, a public
       company, a society or a trust.

 The purpose of audit is to express an opinion on the financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.6  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       Understand that preparation and presentation of financial statements of an
       entity is responsibility of management of entity. The auditor expresses an
       opinion on financial statements by means of written audit report.

       In doing so, he has to see that financial statements would not mislead
       anybody by ensuring that: -

       o the accounts have been drawn up with reference to entries in the books
               of account;

       o the entries in the books of account are adequately supported by
               sufficient and appropriate evidence;

       o none of the entries in the books of account has been omitted in the
               process of compilation;

       o the information conveyed by the statements is clear and unambiguous;

       o the financial statement amounts are properly classified, described and
               disclosed in conformity with accounting standards; and

       o the statement of accounts presents a true and fair picture of the
               operational results and of the assets and liabilities.

Auditing provides assurance. Its basic nature lies in providing assurance to users -
providing confidence to users of financial statements. Such an assurance lends
credibility to financial statements. Audited financial statements provide confidence to
users that financial information reflected in financial statements can be relied upon.

    4. INTERDISCIPLINARY NATURE OF AUDITING-

          RELATIONSHIP WITH DIVERSE SUBJECTS

Auditing is interdisciplinary in nature. It draws from diverse subjects including
accountancy, law, behavioural science, statistics, economics and financial
management and makes use of these subjects. Since audit of financial statements
is concerned with financial information, a sound knowledge of accounting
principles is a fundamental requirement for an auditor of financial statements to
conduct audit and express an opinion. Similarly, good knowledge of business laws
and various taxation laws helps auditor to understand financial statements in a
better way in accordance with applicable laws.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT                                              1.7

During course of audit, auditor has to interact with lot of persons for seeking
information and making inquiries. This can be done only if one has knowledge of
human behaviour. Auditors use statistical methods to draw samples in a scientific
manner. It is not possible for an auditor to check each and every transaction. So,
use of statistical methods to draw samples for conducting audit is made.

Knowledge of subject like economics helps auditor to be familiar with overall
economic environment in which specific business is operating. Financial
management deals with issues such as funds flow, working capital management,
ratio analysis etc. and an auditor is expected to be knowledgeable about these for
applying some of audit procedures and carrying out audit effectively. Besides,
knowledge of financial markets comprised in study of financial management is
expected from a professional auditor.

                                                   Accounting

Production                                                        Law

   Financial                                       Auditing            Economics
Management

    Data                                                          Behavioural
Processing                                                           Science

                                                    Statistics &
                                                   Mathematics

Auditing and Accounting: Auditing reviews the financial statements which are
nothing but a result of the overall accounting process.

Auditing and Law: An auditor should have a good knowledge of business laws
affecting the entity.

Auditing and Economics: Auditor is expected to be familiar with the overall
economic environment of the client.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Auditing and Behavioural Science: Knowledge of human behaviour is essential
for an auditor to effectively discharge his duties.

Auditing and Statistics & Mathematics: Auditor is also expected to have the
knowledge of statistical sampling for meaningful conclusions and mathematics for
verification of inventories.

Auditing and Data Processing: EDP auditing in itself is developing as a discipline
in itself.

Auditing and Financial Management : Auditor is expected to have knowledge
about various financial techniques such as working capital management, funds
flow, ratio analysis, capital budgeting etc.

Auditing and Production: Good auditor is one who understands the client and his
business functions such as production, cost system, marketing etc.

    5. OBJECTIVES OF AUDIT

In conducting audit of financial statements, objectives of auditor in accordance with
SA-200 "Overall Objectives of the Independent auditor and the conduct of an audit
in accordance with Standards on Auditing" are: -

(a) To obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
       whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error,
       thereby enabling the auditor to express an opinion on whether the financial
       statements are prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with an
       applicable financial reporting framework; and

(b) To report on the financial statements, and communicate as required by the
       SAs, in accordance with the auditor's findings.

An analysis of above brings out following points clearly: -

(1) Auditor's objective is to obtain a reasonable assurance whether financial
       statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to
       fraud or error.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT     1.9

       Reasonable assurance is to be distinguished from absolute assurance. Absolute
       assurance is a complete assurance or a guarantee that financial statements
       are free from material misstatements. However, reasonable assurance is not
       a complete guarantee. Although it is a high-level of assurance but it is not
       complete assurance.

       Audit of financial statements is carried out by the auditor with professional
       competence and skills in accordance with Standards on Auditing. Audit
       procedures are applied in accordance with SAs, audit evidence is obtained
       and evaluated. On basis of that, conclusions are drawn and opinion is formed.
       It leads to high level of assurance which is called as reasonable assurance but
       it is not absolute assurance.

(2) Misstatements in financial statements can occur due to fraud or error or both.
       The auditor seeks to obtain reasonable assurance whether financial
       statements as a whole are free from material misstatements caused by fraud
       or error. He has to see effect of misstatements on financial statements as a
       whole, in totality.

(3) Obtaining reasonable assurance that financial statements as a whole are free
       from material misstatements enables the auditor to express an opinion on
       whether the financial statements are prepared, in all material respects, in
       accordance with an applicable financial reporting framework.

(4) The opinion is reported and communicated in accordance with audit findings
       through a written report as required by Standards on Auditing. (You would be
       studying about these in subsequent parts of this Chapter).

An Overview of Objectives of Audit

Checkbox  Objectives of audit
    
          Obtaining a reasonable assurance that financial statements as a whole
          are free from material misstatement due to fraud or error
    
          Gaining a reasonable assurance leads to formation of opinion whether
          financial statements are prepared, in all material respects, in accordance
          with applicable financial reporting framework

          To report on the financial statements

          Reporting of opinion in accordance with audit findings

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  1.10      AUDITING AND ETHICS

  Communication of reporting

  Reporting and communication in accordance with Standards on

  Auditing

    6. SCOPE OF AUDIT-WHAT IT INCLUDES

Scope refers to range or reach of something. The purpose of an audit is to enhance
the degree of confidence of intended users in the financial statements. Users of
financial statements may be shareholders, employees, customers, government and
regulatory authorities, bankers etc. Enhancing of degree of confidence is achieved
by the expression of an opinion by the auditor on whether the financial statements
are prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with an applicable financial
reporting framework.

(Applicable financial reporting framework means a framework adopted in the
preparation and presentation of the financial statements that is acceptable in view
of the nature of the entity and the objective of the financial statements, or that is
required by law or regulation.)

For example, in case of companies in India, financial reporting framework is
provided under Schedule III of the Companies Act,2013.

The following points are included in scope of audit of financial statements: -

(1) Coverage of all aspects of entity

       Audit of financial statements should be organized adequately to cover all
       aspects of the entity relevant to the financial statements being audited.

(2) Reliability and sufficiency of financial information

       The auditor should be reasonably satisfied that information contained in
       underlying accounting records and other source data (like bills, vouchers,
       documents etc.) is reliable and sufficient basis for preparation of financial
       statements.

       The auditor makes a judgment of reliability and sufficiency of financial
       information by making a study and assessment of accounting systems and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.11

       internal controls and by carrying out appropriate tests, enquiries and
       procedures.

(3) Proper disclosure of financial information

       The auditor should also decide whether relevant information is properly
       disclosed in the financial statements. He should also keep in mind applicable
       statutory requirements in this regard.

       It is done by ensuring that financial statements properly summarize
       transactions and events recorded therein and by considering the judgments
       made by management in preparation of financial statements.

       The management responsible for preparation and presentation of financial
       statements makes many judgments in this process of preparing and
       presenting financial statements. For example, choosing of appropriate
       accounting policies in relation to various accounting issues like choosing
       method of charging depreciation on fixed assets or choosing appropriate
       method for valuation of inventories.

       The auditor evaluates selection and consistent application of accounting
       policies by management; whether such a selection is proper and whether
       chosen policy has been applied consistently on a period-to-period basis.

       Understand that financial statements of an entity are prepared on historical
       financial information basis. "Historical financial information" means
       information expressed in financial terms in relation to a particular entity,
       derived primarily from that entity's accounting system, about economic
       events occurring in past time periods or about economic conditions or
       circumstances at points in time in the past.

       For example, when purchases and sales are reflected in financial statements
       of an entity, these are examples of historical financial information. These are
       about transactions which have occurred in past.

Since financial statements are prepared on the basis of historical financial
information, it is logical that audit of financial statements is also based upon such
historical financial information. Therefore, audit of financial statements is based
upon historical financial information.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           1.12  AUDITING AND ETHICS

6.1 Scope of audit-What it does not include

Auditor is not expected to perform duties which fall outside domain of his
competence. For example, physical condition of certain assets like that of
sophisticated machinery cannot be determined by him. Similarly, it is not expected
from an auditor to determine suitability and life of civil structures like buildings.
These require different skillsets which may be performed by qualified engineers in
their respective fields.

An auditor is not an expert in authentication of documents. The genuineness of
documents cannot be authenticated by him because he is not an expert in this field.

An audit is not an official investigation into alleged wrong doing. He does not have
any specific legal powers of search or recording statements of witness on oath
which may be necessary for carrying out an official investigation.

Audit is distinct from investigation. Investigation is a critical examination of the
accounts with a special purpose. For example, if fraud is suspected and it is
specifically called upon to check the accounts whether fraud really exists, it takes
character of investigation.

The objective of audit, on the other hand, as has already been discussed, is to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, thereby enabling
the auditor to express an opinion.

The scope of audit is general and broad whereas scope of investigation is specific
and narrow.

An Overview of Scope of Audit

Check box  Scope of audit of financial statements
     
           Coverage of all aspects of entity relevant to the financial statements
           being audited.
           Reliability and Sufficiency of financial information
           Proper disclosure of financial information
           Expression of an opinion on financial statements

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT            1.13

X  Responsibility of preparation and presentation of financial

   statements

X  Duties outside scope of competence of auditor

X  Expertise in authentication of documents

X  Investigation

Test Your Understanding 1

Lalji Bhai has purchased shares of a company listed on NSE. The audited financial
statements of the company provide picture of healthy financial performance having
robust turnover, low debt and good profits. On above basis, he is absolutely
satisfied that money invested by him is safe and there is no chance of losing his
money. Do audited results and audit reports of companies provide such assurance
to investors like Lalji Bhai? Is thinking of Lalji Bhai correct?

Test Your Understanding 2

Good deeds Limited is engaged in business of recycling of wastes from dumping
grounds of municipal corporation of Indore to usable manure. It is, in this way,
also, helping to make the city clean.

During course of audit by Zoha & Zoha, a firm of auditors, it is observed by auditors
that company has received a notice from Central Bench of National Green Tribunal
for not following certain environmental regulations involving imposition of hefty
monetary penalty on the company. The company is yet to reply to the notice. The
auditors point out that same is not stated in notes to accounts in financial
statements. The company points out that auditors are going beyond scope of their
work. Does such a matter fall within scope of audit?

Test Your Understanding 3

A huge fire broke out in NOIDA plant of KT Limited. Plant assets comprising
building, machinery and inventories were insured from branch of a public sector
insurance company. Apart from an insurance surveyor who was deputed for
assessing loss, the regional office of insurance PSU also appointed a CA for
verification of books of accounts/ financial records of the company and
circumstances surrounding the loss. He was also requested to submit an early
report. Would the report by CA in nature of audit report?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.14  AUDITING AND ETHICS

    7. INHERENT LIMITATIONS OF AUDIT

The process of audit suffers from certain inbuilt limitations due to which an auditor
cannot obtain an absolute assurance that financial statements are free from
misstatement due to fraud or error. These fundamental limitations arise due to the
following factors: -

(1) Nature of financial reporting

       Preparation of financial statements involves making many judgments by
       management. These judgments may involve subjective decisions or a degree
       of uncertainty. Therefore, auditor may not be able to obtain absolute
       assurance that financial statements are free from material misstatements due
       to frauds or errors.

       One of the premises for conducting an audit is that management
       acknowledges its responsibility of preparation of financial statements in
       accordance with applicable financial reporting framework and for devising
       suitable internal controls. However, such controls may not have operated to
       produce reliable financial information due to their own limitations.

       Consider, for example, that management of a company has devised a control
       that all purchase bills should reflect stamp and signatures of an authorised
       person in "Goods Receiving Section" of the company stating the date and
       time of receiving goods in premises. It is an example of internal control
       devised by the company to ensure that only those purchase bills are produced
       for payment for which goods have been actually received. Now, what
       happens if concerned accountant and authorised person in "Goods Receiving
       Section" collude. It is a case of overriding of internal controls devised by the
       company due to collusion between two persons. Such a probable collusion is
       one of limitations of internal controls itself.

(2) Nature of Audit procedures

       The auditor carries out his work by obtaining audit evidence through
       performance of audit procedures. However, there are practical and legal
       limitations on ability of auditor to obtain audit evidence. For example, an
       auditor does not test all transactions and balances. He forms his opinion only

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.15

       by testing samples. It is an example of practical limitation on auditor's ability
       to obtain audit evidence.

       Management may not provide complete information as requested by auditor.
       There is no way by which auditor can force management to provide complete
       information as may be requested by auditor. In case he is not provided with
       required information, he can only report. It is an example of legal limitation
       on auditor's ability to obtain audit evidence.

       The management may consist of dishonest and unscrupulous people and may
       be, itself, involved in fraud. It may be engaged in concealing fraud by
       designing sophisticated and carefully organized schemes which may be hard
       to detect by the auditor. It may produce fabricated documents before auditor
       to lead him to believe that audit evidence is valid. However, in reality, such
       documents could be fake or non-genuine.

       We have already discussed under section on scope of audit that an auditor is
       not an expert in authentication of documents. Therefore, he may be led to
       accept invalid audit evidence on the basis of unauthentic documents.

       It is quite possible that entity may have entered into some transactions with
       related parties. Such transactions may be only paper transactions and may
       not have actually occurred. The auditor may not be aware of such related
       party relationships or audit procedures may not be able to detect probable
       wrong doings in such transactions.

(3) Not in nature of investigation

       As already discussed, audit is not an official investigation. Hence, auditor
       cannot obtain absolute assurance that financial statements are free from
       material misstatements due to frauds or errors.

(4) Timeliness of financial reporting and decrease in relevance of
       information over time

       The relevance of information decreases over time and auditor cannot verify
       each and every matter. Therefore, a balance has to be struck between
       reliability of information and cost of obtaining it.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.16               AUDITING AND ETHICS

Consider, for example, an auditor who is conducting audit of a company since
last two years. During these two years, he has sought detailed information
from management of company regarding various matters. During his third-
year stint, he chooses to rely upon some information obtained as part of audit
procedures of second year. However, it could be possible that something new
has happened and that information is not relevant. So, the information being
relied upon by auditor is not timely and may have lost its reliability.

(5) Future events

Future events or conditions may affect an entity adversely. Adverse events
may seriously affect ability of an entity to continue its business. The business
may cease to exist in future due to change in market conditions, emergence
of new business models or products or due to onset of some adverse events.

Therefore, it is in view of above factors, that an auditor cannot provide a
guarantee that financial statements are free from material misstatements due
to frauds or errors.

Inherent Limitations of Audit (SA 200 "Overall Objectives of the Independent
Auditor and the Conduct of an Audit in Accordance with Standards on Auditing"):
The auditor is not expected to, and cannot, reduce audit risk to zero because there
are inherent limitations of an audit. The inherent limitations of an audit arise from:

The Nature of Financial Reporting: The preparation of financial statements involves
judgment by management.

The Nature of Audit Procedures: There are practical and legal limitations on the
auditor's ability to obtain audit evidence such as:

Possibility that management or others may          Fraud may involve sophisticated
not provide, intentionally or unintentionally,     and carefully organised schemes.
the complete information relevant for
preparation and presentation of FS.

Not in the nature of Investigation: An audit is not an official investigation into
alleged wrongdoing.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT  1.17

Timeliness of financial reporting and decrease in relevance of information
over time: Relevance of information, and thereby its value, tends to diminish
over time, and there is a balance to be struck between the reliability of
information and its cost.

Future events: Future events or conditions may affect an entity adversely. Adverse
events may seriously affect ability of an entity to continue its Business.

    8. WHAT IS AN ENGAGEMENT?

Engagement means an arrangement to do something. In the context of auditing, it
means a formal agreement between auditor and client under which auditor agrees
to provide auditing services. It takes the shape of engagement letter.

8.1 External audit engagements

The purpose of external audit engagements is to enhance the degree of
confidence of intended users of financial statements. Such engagements are also
reasonable assurance engagements. For example, in India, companies are required
to get their annual accounts audited by an external auditor. Even non-corporate
entities may choose to have their accounts audited by an external auditor because
of benefits of such an audit.

    9. BENEFITS OF AUDIT-WHY AUDIT IS NEEDED?

 Audited accounts provide high quality information. It gives confidence to
       users that information on which they are relying is qualitative and it is the
       outcome of an exercise carried out by following Auditing Standards
       recognized globally.

 In case of companies, shareholders may or may not be involved in daily affairs
       of the company. The financial statements are prepared by management
       consisting of directors. As shareholders are owners of the company, they need
       an independent mechanism so that financial information is qualitative and
       reliable. Hence, their interest is safeguarded by an audit.

 An audit acts as a moral check on employees from committing frauds for the
       fear of being discovered by audit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.18  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 Audited financial statements are helpful to government authorities for
       determining tax liabilities.

 Audited financial statements can be relied upon by lenders, bankers for making
       their credit decisions i.e. whether to lend or not to lend to a particular entity.

 An audit may also detect fraud or error or both.

 An audit reviews existence and operations of various controls operating in
       any entity. Hence, it is useful at pointing out deficiencies.

    10. AUDIT- MANDATORY OR VOLUNTARY?

It is not necessary that audit is always legally mandatory. There are entities like
companies who are compulsorily required to get their accounts audited under law.
Even non-corporate entities may be compulsorily requiring audit of their accounts
under tax laws. For example, in India, every person is required to get accounts
audited if turnover crosses certain threshold limit under income tax law.

It is also possible that some entities like schools may be required to get their
accounts audited for the purpose of obtaining grant or assistance from the
Government.

Audit is not always mandatory. Many entities may get their accounts audited
voluntarily because of benefits from the process of audit. Many such concerns have
their internal rules requiring audit due to advantages flowing from an audit.

    11. WHO APPOINTS AN AUDITOR?

Generally, an auditor is appointed by owners or in some cases by constitutional or
government authorities in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. For
example, in case of companies, auditor is appointed by members (shareholders) in
Annual General Meeting (AGM). Shareholders are owners of a company and
auditor is appointed by them in AGM.

However, in case of government companies in India, auditor is appointed by
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG), an independent constitutional
authority.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.19

Take case of a firm who engages an auditor to audit its accounts. In such a case,
auditor is appointed by partners of firm.

There may be a situation in which auditor may be appointed by a government
authority in accordance with some law or regulation. For example, an auditor may
be appointed under tax laws by a government authority.

    12. TO WHOM REPORT IS SUBMITTED BY AN
          AUDITOR?

The outcome of an audit is written audit report in which auditor expresses an opinion.
The report is submitted to person making the appointment. In case of companies,
these are shareholders- in case of a firm, to partners who have engaged him.

We shall now discuss understanding reached so far from a case study involving
discussion among students regarding nature, scope, limitations, benefits of
auditing and other related matters.

CASE STUDY-1

Rohit, Gurpreet, Ali and Goreti are friends since their school days based in Mumbai.
They have cleared CA foundation exams in the same attempt and now plan to
appear for CA Intermediate exams. All of them are avid news listeners and regularly
keep track of business news even on social media.

They are trying to understand new subjects including auditing. Rohit, Gurpreet and
Ali have also started attending Live Coaching Classes (LCC) being conducted by
Board of studies of ICAI. Goreti has not been able to join Live Coaching Classes yet
as she was away on a holiday with her parents. However, she plans to catch it up
with her friends very soon. Ali had also joined the classes but he had skipped some
lectures.

During one informal get together, their discussions centred around new subject of
auditing. They discussed many things regarding its nature, scope, benefits and
other general practical issues. Goreti was regular in keeping track of audited results
of companies being published in leading newspapers. Her view was that audited
financial statements of companies give 100% guarantee to different stake holders.
It is the main reason behind so much reliance upon auditing. But she could not

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.20  AUDITING AND ETHICS

understand why wrong doings in financial matters are being discovered after many
years have gone by.
Ali also concurred with her view and added that when financial statements are
audited, each and every transaction appearing in books of accounts is verified.
However, he could not give clarity to Goreti.
Gurpreet was of the opinion that audit was conducted on the basis of sample
checking. He was also of the view that audited financial statements are not a
guarantee against probable wrong doings in financial matters of the companies.
Not to be left behind, Rohit also jumped in the fray. He supported Gurpreet and
also added something of his own.

Based on above, answer the following questions: -

1. Gurpreet was of the view that audited financial statements are not a guarantee
       against probable wrong doings in financial matters of companies. What kind
       of assurance does audit of financial statements provide?

       (a) It provides reasonable assurance meaning a moderate level of assurance.

       (b) It provides reasonable assurance meaning a low level of assurance.

       (c) It provides reasonable assurance meaning a high level of assurance.

       (d) It provides reasonable assurance meaning an absolute level of assurance.

2. Rohit added that auditor can force an employee of the company to provide him
       required information and documents. Can he do so?

       (a) Yes, he can do so. It is necessary to obtain audit evidence.

       (b) Yes, he can do so. There are express rights given to him in this respect.

       (c) No, he cannot do so. He can only request for providing him with necessary
               information and documents. But it cannot be forced by him.

       (d) No, he cannot do so. He has no right of seeking information and
               documents. Therefore, question of forcing does not arise.

3. Ali had listened in one of the classes that audit covers all aspects of an entity
       and concluded that each and every transaction of entity is verified by auditor.
       Goreti also seemed to be in agreement with him but she was of the view that

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.21

       besides this, it also meant that audit should be so organized to cover all areas
       of an entity. Which of following statements is appropriate in this regard?

       (a) Only view of Ali is correct.

       (b) Only view of Goreti is correct.

       (c) Views of both Ali and Goreti are correct.

       (d) Views of both Ali and Goreti are incorrect.

4. All of them also discussed about benefits of auditing. Which of the following is
       not a likely benefit of auditing?

       (a) Since auditing is connected to future events, audited information can be
               easily relied upon by users.

       (b) Errors or frauds may be discovered during audit.

       (c) Government authorities can make use of audited accounts for different
               purposes.

       (d) It can help in bringing out deficiencies in maintenance of financial
               records.

5. Goreti told her friends that she had read a news report about how a company
       had misled its auditors by producing some fabricated documents. Which of
       following statements seems to be appropriate in this regard?

       (a) It was wrong on the part of auditor to rely upon fabricated documents.
               He must have discovered it as the same falls within the scope of his duties.

       (b) Although it was wrong on the part of auditor to rely upon fabricated
               documents, he cannot do anything in the matter. He has to report on the
               basis of documents provided to him. He has no duty in this regard.

       (c) Auditor has to conduct audit by exercising professional skill. But he is not
               an expert in discovering genuineness of documents. Hence, management
               consisting of dishonest persons may have led him to rely upon fabricated
               documents deliberately.

       (d) Management cannot mislead auditor due to high level of knowledge and
               expertise possessed by him. The above is an outlier case-one of the rare
               odd cases.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.22  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Answer to Questions involving Case Studies

1. (c) 2. (c) 3. (d) 4. (a) 5. (c)

Test Your Understanding 4

Zeeba Products is a partnership firm engaged in trading of designer dresses. The firm
has appointed JJ & Co, Chartered accountants to audit their accounts for a year. The
auditors were satisfied with control systems of firm, carried out required procedures
and necessary verifications. In particular, they carried out sample checking of
purchases, traced purchase bills to GST portal and also made confirmations from
suppliers. They were satisfied with audit evidence obtained by them as part of audit
exercise. An audit report was submitted to the firm giving an opinion that financial
statements reflected true and fair view of state of affairs of the firm.

However, later on, it was discovered that purchase manager responsible for
procuring dresses from one location was also booking fake purchases of small
values by colluding with unethical dealers. Payments to these dealers were also
made in connivance with accountant through banking channel.

The partners of firm blame auditors for futile audit exercise. Are partners of firm
correct in their view point? Imagine any probable reason for such a situation.

Audit is a type of assurance engagement under which auditor gives an opinion as
to whether financial statements give a true and fair view of state of affairs of the
concern. However, assurance engagements are not restricted to audit alone. We
shall now discuss meaning of assurance engagement and different types of
assurance engagements.

    13. MEANING OF ASSURANCE ENGAGEMENT

"Assurance engagement" means an engagement in which a practitioner expresses a
conclusion designed to enhance the degree of confidence of the intended users
other than the responsible party about the outcome of the evaluation or
measurement of a subject matter against criteria.

It means that the practitioner gives an opinion about specific information due to
which users of information are able to make confident decisions knowing well that
chance of information being incorrect is diminished.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.23

13.1 Elements of an Assurance Engagement

Following elements comprise an assurance engagement: -

1 A three party relationship involving a practitioner, a responsible party,
       and intended users

       An assurance engagement involves abovesaid three parties. A practitioner is
       a person who provides the assurance. The term practitioner is broader than
       auditor. Audit is related to historical information whereas practitioner may
       provide assurance not necessarily related to historical financial information.

       A responsible party is the party responsible for preparation of subject matter.

       Intended users are the persons for whom an assurance report is prepared.
       These persons may use the report in making decisions.

2. An appropriate subject matter

       It refers to the information to be examined by the practitioner. For example,
       financial information contained in financial statements while conducting
       audit of financial statements.

3. Suitable criteria

       These refer to benchmarks used to evaluate the subject matter like standards,
       guidance, laws, rules and regulations.

4. Sufficient appropriate evidence

       The practitioner performs an assurance engagement to obtain sufficient
       appropriate evidence. It is on the basis of evidence that conclusions are
       arrived and an opinion is formed by auditor.

       "Sufficient" relates to quantity of evidence obtained by auditor.
       "Appropriate" relates to quality of evidence obtained by auditor. One
       evidence may be providing more comfort to auditor than the other evidence.
       The evidence providing more comfort is qualitative and, therefore,
       appropriate. Evidence should be both sufficient and appropriate.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  1.24               AUDITING AND ETHICS

5. A written assurance report in appropriate form

       A written report is provided containing conclusion that conveys the assurance
       about the subject matter. A written assurance report is the outcome of an
       assurance engagement.

Overview of Elements of assurance engagement

Checkbox Elements of an assurance engagement

  Three Party relationship

  An appropriate subject matter

  Suitable Criteria

  Sufficient appropriate evidence

  Written assurance report in appropriate form

13.2 Meaning of Review; Audit Vs. Review

We have learnt that audit is a reasonable assurance engagement. It provides
reasonable assurance. However, review is a limited assurance engagement. It
provides lower level of assurance than audit. Further, review involves fewer
procedures and gathers sufficient appropriate evidence on the basis of which
limited conclusions can be drawn up. However, both "audit" and "review" are
related to financial statements prepared on the basis of historical financial
information.

13.3 Types of Assurance Engagements- Reasonable assurance
      engagement vs. Limited assurance engagement

As already discussed, assurance engagements provide assurance to users. The
difference is of degree. Reasonable assurance engagement like audit provides
reasonable assurance which is a high level of assurance. Limited assurance
engagement like review provides lower level of assurance than audit. It is only a
moderate level of assurance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT                                      1.25

Reasonable assurance engagement Limited assurance engagement

Reasonable assurance engagement Limited assurance engagement provides

provides high level of assurance.                  lower level of assurance than reasonable

                                                   assurance engagement.

It performs elaborate and extensive It performs fewer procedures as

procedures to obtain sufficient compared to reasonable assurance

appropriate evidence.                              engagement.

It draws reasonable conclusions on the It involves obtaining sufficient
basis of sufficient appropriate evidence. appropriate evidence to draw limited

                                                        conclusions.

Example of reasonable assurance Example of limited assurance
engagement is an audit engagement. engagement is review engagement.

Besides reasonable assurance engagements and limited assurance engagements,
there is another kind of assurance which is related to matters other than historical
financial information. Such an assurance may relate to prospective financial
information and not to historical financial information. It may relate to providing
assurance on internal controls in an entity.

"Prospective financial information" means financial information based on
assumptions about events that may occur in the future and possible actions by an
entity. It can be in the form of a forecast or projection or combination of both.

It is to be noted that in such type of assurance engagements, examination is not of
historical financial information.

Here, it is important to note the difference between "Historical financial
information" and "Prospective financial information." The former relates to
information expressed in financial terms of an entity about economic events,
conditions or circumstances occurring in past periods. The latter relates to financial
information based on assumptions about occurrence of future events and possible
actions by an entity.

Therefore, historical financial information is rooted in past events which have
already occurred whereas prospective financial information is related to future
events.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  1.26            AUDITING AND ETHICS

In assurance reports involving prospective financial information, the practitioner
obtains sufficient appropriate evidence to the effect that management's
assumptions on which the prospective financial information is based are not
unreasonable, the prospective financial information is properly prepared on the
basis of the assumptions and it is properly presented and all material assumptions
are adequately disclosed.

Prospective financial information relates to future events. While evidence may be
available to support the assumptions on which the prospective financial
information is based, such evidence is itself generally future- oriented. The auditor
is, therefore, not in a position to express an opinion as to whether the results shown
in the prospective financial information will be achieved.

Therefore, in such assurance engagements, practitioner provides a report assuring
that nothing has come to practitioner's attention to suggest that these assumptions
do not provide a reasonable basis for the projection.

Hence, such type of assurance engagement provides only a "moderate" level of
assurance.

Examples of assurance engagements

Checkbox Example of assurance Type of assurance engagement
                 engagement

  Audit       of      financial Reasonable assurance engagement

  statements

  Review of financial Limited assurance engagement

  statements

  Examination of Prospective Provides              assurance                 regarding

  financial information                            reasonability of assumptions forming

                                                   basis of projections and related matters

  Report on controls Provides assurance regarding design and

  operating       at                               an operation of controls

  organization

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT           1.27

                        Assurance Engagements

Reasonable Assurance    Limited Assurance       Assurance Engagements
      Engagement           Engagement          dealing with matters other

                 Audit              Review       than historical financial
                                                        information

                                                       Examination of prospective
                                                        financial information (like

                                                          forecast) or assurance
                                                         regarding operations of

                                                                   controls

Test Your Understanding 5

The management of Exotic Tours and Travels Limited requests its auditor Raja &
Co.to provide an assurance report on the financial information for first quarter of a
year by skipping required detailed procedures.
Can Raja & Co. provide such a report? What would be nature of such a report? Would
it be necessary for them to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence in such a case?

    14. QUALITIES OF AUDITOR

An auditor is concerned with the reporting on financial matters of business and
other institutions. Financial matters inherently are to be set with the problems of
human fallibility; errors and frauds are frequent.
Tact, caution, firmness, good temper, integrity, discretion, industry, judgement,
patience, clear headedness and reliability are some of qualities which an auditor

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.28  AUDITING AND ETHICS

should have. In short, all those personal qualities that go to make a good
businessman contribute to the making of a good auditor.

In addition, he must have the shine of culture for attaining a great height. He must
have the highest degree of integrity backed by adequate independence.

The auditor, who holds a position of trust, must have the basic human qualities
apart from the technical requirement of professional training and education. He is
called upon constantly to critically review financial statements and it is obviously
useless for him to attempt that task unless his own knowledge is that of an expert.
An exhaustive knowledge of accounting in all its branches is the sine qua non of
the practice of auditing. He must know thoroughly all accounting principles and
techniques.

    15. ENGAGEMENT AND QUALITY CONTROL
          STANDARDS: AN OVERVIEW

The following Standards issued under authority of ICAI Council are collectively
known as Engagement Standards: -

1. Standards on auditing (SAs) which apply in audit of historical financial
       information.

2. Standards on review engagements (SREs) which apply in review of historical
       financial information.

3. Standards on Assurance engagements (SAEs) which apply in assurance
       engagements other than audits and review of historical financial information.

4. Standards on Related Services (SRSs) which apply in agreed upon procedures
       to information, compilation engagements and other related service
       engagements.

The purpose of issue of these standards is to establish high quality standards and
guidance in the areas of financial statement audits and in other types of assurance
services.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.29

15.1 Standards on Auditing

Standards on Auditing apply in the context of an audit of financial statements by
an independent auditor. It is important to remember that Standards on Auditing
apply in audit of historical information. These establish high quality benchmarks
and are followed by auditors in conducting audit of financial statements.

Standards on Auditing have been issued on wide spectrum of issues in the field of
auditing ranging from overall objectives of independent auditor, audit
documentation, planning an audit of financial statements, identifying and assessing
risk of material misstatement, audit sampling, audit evidence and forming an
opinion and reporting on financial statements. These cover all significant aspects
of audit of financial statements.

Some examples of Standards on Auditing are: -

 SA 200 Overall Objectives of the Independent Auditor and the Conduct of an
       Audit in accordance with Standards on Auditing

 SA 230 Audit Documentation

 SA 315 Identifying and Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatement through
       Understanding the Entity and its Environment

 SA 500 Audit Evidence

 Revised SA 700 Forming an Opinion and Reporting on Financial Statements

15.2 Standards on Review Engagements

Standards on review engagements apply in the context of review of financial
statements. We have already understood that review is a limited assurance
engagement and it provides assurance which is lower than that provided by audit.
It is due to the fact that review involves fewer procedures as compared to audit.
Since a review also provides assurance to users, it also involves obtaining sufficient
appropriate evidence. For example, when an auditor performs review of interim
financial information of an entity.

Examples of Standards on Review engagements are:

 SRE 2400 (Revised) Engagements to Review Historical Financial Statements

 SRE 2410 Review of Interim Financial Information Performed by the
       Independent Auditor of the Entity

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.30  AUDITING AND ETHICS

It is to be noted that both Standards on auditing and Standards on review
engagements apply to engagements involving historical financial information.

15.3 Standards on Assurance Engagements

There is another set of standards which apply in assurance engagements dealing
with subject matters other than historical financial information. Such assurance
engagements do not include "audit" or "review" of historical financial information.
These standards are known as Standards on Assurance Engagements. For example,
an assurance engagement relating to examination of prospective financial
information.

It is to be noted that in such type of assurance engagements, examination is not of
historical financial information or engagement may relate to providing assurance
regarding non-financial matters like design and operation of internal control in an
entity.

Examples of Standards on Assurance Engagements are:

 SAE 3400 The Examination of Prospective Financial Information

 SAE 3420 Assurance Engagements to Report on the Compilation of Pro Forma
       Financial Information Included in a Prospectus

15.4 Standards on Related Services

Lastly, there are standards on related services. These standards apply in
engagements to perform agreed-upon procedures regarding financial information.

For example, an engagement to perform agreed-upon procedures may require the
auditor to perform certain procedures concerning individual items of financial data,
say, accounts payable, accounts receivable, purchases from related parties and
sales and profits of a segment of an entity, or a financial statement, say, a balance
sheet or even a complete set of financial statements.

An engagement in which practitioner may be called upon to assist management
with the preparation and presentation of historical financial information without
obtaining assurance on that information. Such type of compilation engagements
fall in the category of related services and practitioner issues a report clearly stating
that it is not an assurance engagement and no opinion is being expressed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.31

These types of services are called related services and standards have been issued
to deal with practitioner's responsibilities in this regard.

Examples of Standards on related services are:

 SRS 4400 Engagements to perform agreed-upon procedures regarding
       financial information

 SRS 4410 (Revised) Compilation engagements

It is to be clearly understood that all the above standards i.e., Standards on Auditing
(SAs), Standards on Review Engagements (SREs), Standards on Assurance
Engagements (SAEs) and Standards on related services (SRSs) are collectively
known as the Engagement Standards.

Engagement Standards issued under the authority of Council of ICAI deal with
responsibilities of auditor/practitioner.

15.5 Standards on Quality Control

Standards on Quality Control (SQCs) have been issued to establish standards and
provide guidance regarding a firm's responsibilities for its system of quality control
for the conduct of audit and review of historical financial information and for other
assurance and related service engagements.

SQC 1 has been issued in this regard. It requires auditors/practitioners to establish
system of quality control so that firm and its personnel comply with professional
standards and regulatory & legal requirements and reports issued are appropriate.

Its basic objective is that while rendering services, to which engagement standards
apply, there should be a system of quality control with in firms to ensure complying
with professional standards/legal requirements. System of quality control ensures
issuing of appropriate reports in the circumstances.

Further, it is also to be remembered that Standards on Quality Control (SQCs) are
to be applied for all services covered by Engagement Standards.

15.6 Why are Standards needed?

· Standards ensure carrying out of audit against established benchmarks at par
       with global practices.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          1.32  AUDITING AND ETHICS

· Standards improve quality of financial reporting thereby helping users to
       make diligent decisions.

· Standards promote uniformity as audit of financial statements is carried out
       following these Standards.

· Standards equip professional accountants with professional knowledge and
       skill.

· Standards ensure audit quality.

15.7 Duties in relation to Engagement and Quality Control

       Standards

It is the duty of professional accountants to see that Standards are followed in
engagements undertaken by them. Ordinarily, these are to be followed by
professional accountants. However, a situation may arise when a specific procedure
as required in Standards would be ineffective in a particular engagement. In such a
case, he is required to document how alternative procedures performed achieve
the purpose of required procedure. Also, reason for departure has also to be
documented unless it is clear. Further, his report should draw attention to such
departures. It is also to be noted that a mere disclosure in the report does not
absolve a professional accountant from complying with applicable Standards.

Overview of Engagement and Quality Control Standards

Checkbox  Engagement and Quality Control Standards
    
          Standards on auditing (SAs) apply in audit of historical financial
          information.
    
          Standards on review engagements (SREs) apply in review of
          historical financial information.

          Standards on assurance engagements (SAEs) apply in engagements
          dealing in matters other than historical financial information.

          Standards on related services (SRSs) apply in engagements to
          perform agreed-upon procedures regarding financial information
          and other services like assisting management in preparation and
          presentation of financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT                 1.33

  Standards on Quality control (SQC) apply for all services covered by

  engagement standards i.e. SAs, SREs, SAEs and SRSs.

  Duty of professional accountants to follow Standards. If not

  followed, reason for departure to be stated in reports.

Test Your Understanding 6

CA. P Babu is conducting audit of financial statements of Quick Buy Private Limited.
He was not able to obtain external confirmations from certain debtors due to
practical difficulties and peculiar circumstances. However, such a procedure is
mandated under one of Standards on Auditing.

Unable to obtain external confirmations from these debtors, he relied upon sale
details to these parties, e-invoices, e-way bills and also traced payments from these
parties in bank accounts of the company. He was reasonably satisfied with audit
evidence obtained. Is there any other reporting duty cast upon him relating to not
following a mandated procedure in one of Standards on Auditing?

CASE STUDY-2

Me and You Private Limited has been newly incorporated. The plant of the company
has recently started production with the help of funds provided by a bank for
purchase and installation of machinery. Further, the company is also utilizing
working capital credit facilities from the same bank for meeting its day to day
working capital requirements like for purchase of raw materials, labour payment
etc. However, just within six months of its operations, the management feels that
working capital funds are inadequate and situation is creating liquidity issues in the
company.

The management of the company has approached its bankers and requested for
enhancement in working capital credit facilities. The bank manager is insisting upon
financial statements of the company for half year along with report providing
assurance in this respect duly signed by Chartered Accountant as audit is far away.
It also requires projected financial statements for coming years along with a report
from CA providing assurance regarding these projections to consider request of
management.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.34  AUDITING AND ETHICS

The management approaches CA P, who has qualified recently and started
practising. Reports providing assurance for half yearly results and projected
financial statements are sought from CA P. The Management provides necessary
information and records to him in this regard.
Assume, in above case, the company only provides trial balance, financial
statements in draft/preliminary form along with accompanying records for the
relevant half year to CA P and requests him to provide duly signed financial
statements with a report for mutually agreed professional fees.

Based on above, answer the following questions: -

1. The management of company has engaged CA P to issue a duly signed report
       for half year, as referred to in last para of case study. Which of the following
       standards, if any, issued by ICAI are relevant for CA P?

       (a) Standards on Review Engagements

       (b) Standards on Auditing

       (c) Standards on Related Services

       (d) There are no standards for issuing report in such situation.

2. Which of the following statements is MOST APRROPRIATE in given case
       situation?

       (a) CA P can assist management in preparation of financial statements of
               the company. However, issue of a report in such a case is outside the
               scope of work.

       (b) CA P can assist management in preparation of financial statements of
               the company and he can issue an audit report.

       (c) CA P can assist management in preparation of financial statements of
               the company and he can issue a compilation report in this respect.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.35

       (d) The responsibility of preparation of financial statement is of company's
               management. CA P cannot assist management in preparation of financial
               statements of the company. However, he can issue a review report.

3. In the above said scenario for issuance of signed financial statements for half
       year by CA P, as discussed in last para of Case Study, identify the MOST
       APPROPRIATE statement: -

       (a) Standard on Quality control (SQC 1) is not applicable as CA P cannot
               issue audit report.

       (b) Standard on Quality Control (SQC 1) is not applicable as CA P cannot
               issue review report.

       (c) Standard on Quality Control (SQC 1) is applicable in such type of
               engagement.

       (d) Standard on Quality Control (SQC 1) is not applicable as CA P is barred
               from issuing any report in such type of engagement.

4 The banker of company has also requested for projected financial statements
       for coming years along with a report from CA regarding these projections to
       consider request of management. Which of the following standards issued by
       ICAI are relevant for CA P in such a situation, if any?

       (a) Standards on Review Engagements

       (b) There are no standards for issuing such type of reports.

       (c) Standards on Related Services

       (d) Standards on Assurance Engagements

5. Suppose CA P also accepts work of issuing projected financial statements with
       a report to be signed by him. The management has projected turnover of ` 100
       crore for the next year, ` 150 crore & ` 200 crore for following years respectively
       as compared to present turnover of ` 25 crore in current half year. Identify the
       MOST APPROPRIATE statement in this situation: -

       (a) CA P has to satisfy himself regarding arithmetical accuracy of projected
               data.

       (b) CA P has to satisfy himself regarding reasonableness of assumptions
               underlying projected turnover and its consistency with actuals.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      1.36  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(c) CA P has to satisfy himself regarding arithmetical accuracy of data along
       with its proper presentation to banker.

(d) CA P has to satisfy himself regarding reasonableness of assumptions
       underlying projected turnover, its consistency with actuals, disclosure and
       presentation.

Answer to Questions involving Case Study 2

1. c  2. c 3. c 4. d 5. d

SUMMARY

 An audit is an independent examination of financial information of any entity,
       whether profit oriented or not, and irrespective of its size or legal form, when
       such an examination is conducted with a view to expressing an opinion
       thereon.

 An audit provides assurance. It provides confidence to users of financial
       statements.

 Assurance is provided by audit by means of written audit report.

 The basic purpose of an audit of financial statements is to express an opinion
       on the financial statements.

 The independent audit of financial statements provides reasonable assurance.
       It is to be distinguished from absolute or complete assurance. However,
       reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance.

 An auditor is not expected to perform duties falling outside scope of his
       competence.

 There are inherent limitations in process of audit due to nature of financial
       reporting itself, nature of audit procedures, audit not being in nature of
       investigation and other factors. It is due to these reasons audit does not
       provide absolute assurance.

 Audit is a type of assurance engagement. It is a reasonable assurance
       engagement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT                        1.37

 Assurance engagement means an engagement in which a practitioner
       expresses a conclusion designed to enhance the degree of confidence of the
       intended users other than the responsible party about the outcome of the
       evaluation or measurement of a subject matter against criteria.

 Assurance engagement consists of five elements consisting of- a three party
       relationship, an appropriate subject matter, suitable criteria, sufficient
       appropriate evidence and a written assurance report in appropriate form.

 Limited assurance engagement provides lower level of assurance than
       reasonable assurance engagement.

 Audit is a reasonable assurance engagement. Review is a limited assurance
       engagement.

 Assurance engagements consist of reasonable assurance engagements,
       limited assurance engagements and assurance engagements dealing with
       matters other than historical financial information.

 Standards on auditing, Standards on review engagements, Standards on
       assurance engagements and Standards on related services are collectively
       known as engagement standards. These deal with responsibilities of
       auditor/practitioner.

 Standards on quality control have been issued to establish standards and
       provide guidance regarding a firm's responsibilities for its system of quality
       control in providing services dealt by engagement standards.

 Standards are needed for carrying out audit against established benchmarks,
       for improving quality of financial reporting, for promoting uniformity, for
       equipping professional accountants with professional knowledge & skill and
       for ensuring audit quality.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQs based Questions

1. Which of the following is not an advantage of audit?
       (a) It provides high quality financial information.
       (b) It acts as a moral check on employees.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.38  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (c) It enhances risk of management bias.
       (d) It helps in safeguarding interests of shareholders.
2. Which of the following is NOT TRUE about an assurance engagement?
       (a) It relates to providing assurance about historical financial information

               only.
       (b) The practitioner obtains sufficient appropriate evidence.
       (c) There is some information to be examined by practitioner.
       (d) A written assurance report in appropriate form is issued by practitioner.
3. Which of the following is TRUE about Engagement Standards?
       (a) Engagement standards ensure proper rights to practitioners in course of

               performance of their duties.
       (b) Engagement standards ensure preparation and presentation of financial

               statements in a standardized manner.
       (c) Engagement standards ensure uniformity by practitioners in course of

               performance of their duties.
       (d) Engagement standards ensure savings in resources of clients.
4. Consider following statements in relation to "Limited assurance engagement":-
       Statement I - It involves obtaining sufficient appropriate evidence to draw
       reasonable conclusions.
       Statement II - Review of interim financial information of a company is an
       example of limited assurance engagement.
       (a) Statement I is correct. Statement II is incorrect.
       (b) Both Statements I and II are correct.
       (c) Both Statements I and II are incorrect.
       (d) Statement I is incorrect. Statement II is correct.
5. Which of the following is TRUE about Standards on auditing?
       (a) These deal mainly with voluntary responsibilities of auditors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.39

(b) These deal mainly with mandatory responsibilities of auditors.
(c) Their sole purpose is to help government authorities in augmenting

       revenues.
(d) These deal mainly in carrying out audit according to legal provisions.

Correct /Incorrect

State with reasons (in short) whether the following statements are correct
or incorrect:

(i) The basic objective of audit does not change with reference to nature, size or
       form of an entity.

(ii) The purpose of an audit is to enhance the degree of confidence of intended
       users in the financial statements.

(iii) The auditor is not expected to, and cannot, reduce audit risk to zero and cannot
       therefore obtain absolute assurance that the financial statements are free from
       material misstatement due to fraud or error.

Theoretical Questions

1. "Choosing of appropriate accounting policies in relation to accounting issues is
       responsibility of management". Do you agree? Discuss duty of auditor, if any,
       in relation to accounting policies.

2. Assurance engagements are not restricted to audit of financial statements
       alone. Discuss.

3. An assurance engagement involves a three party relationship. Discuss meaning
       of three parties in such an engagement.

4. A Chartered Accountant is specifically asked to check accounts whether fraud
       exists. State with reasons whether it is an example of reasonable assurance
       engagement.

5. An audit does not provide absolute assurance. Discuss how nature of audit
       procedures itself is one of the reasons due to which audit cannot provide
       absolute assurance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.40  AUDITING AND ETHICS

ANSWERS/ SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs based Questions

1. (c) 2. (a) 3. (c) 4. (d) 5. (b)

Answers to Correct/Incorrect

(i) Correct: An audit is an independent examination of financial information of
       any entity, whether profit oriented or not, and irrespective of its size or legal
       form, when such an examination is conducted with a view to expressing an
       opinion thereon. It is clear that the basic objective of auditing, i.e., expression
       of opinion on financial statements does not change with reference to nature,
       size or form of an entity.

(ii) Correct: As per SA 200 "Overall Objectives of the Independent Auditor and
       the Conduct of an Audit in Accordance with Standards on Auditing", the
       purpose of an audit is to enhance the degree of confidence of intended users
       in the financial statements. This is achieved by the expression of an opinion
       by the auditor on whether the financial statements are prepared, in all
       material respects, in accordance with an applicable financial reporting
       framework.

(iii) Correct: As per SA 200 "Overall Objectives of the Independent Auditor and
       the Conduct of an Audit in Accordance with Standards on Auditing", the
       auditor is not expected to, and cannot, reduce audit risk to zero and cannot
       therefore obtain absolute assurance that the financial statements are free
       from material misstatement due to fraud or error. This is because there are
       inherent limitations of an audit, which result in most of the audit evidence on
       which the auditor draws conclusions and bases the auditor's opinion being
       persuasive rather than conclusive.

Answers to the Theoretical Questions

1. Choosing of appropriate accounting policies is responsibility of management.
       The role of auditor lies in evaluating selection and consistent application of
       accounting policies by management- Refer to scope of audit- what it
       includes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
NATURE, OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF AUDIT               1.41

2. Refer to examples on assurance engagements.
3. Refer to elements of assurance engagement.
4. It is not a reasonable assurance engagement. It is in nature of investigation.
5. Refer to second point of inherent limitations of audit.

Answers to Questions involving Test Your Understanding

1. An audit does not provide assurance to investor in shares regarding safety of
       his money. Share prices of securities are affected by range of factors. An audit
       only provides reasonable assurance that financial statements are free from
       material misstatement whether due to fraud or error. Hence, thinking of Lalji
       Bhai is not correct.

2. Proper disclosure of financial information is well within scope of audit.

3. Appointment of CA for verification of books of accounts/financial records and
       circumstances surrounding the loss is for a specific objective to determine
       genuineness of loss and any issue affecting liability of insurance company. It
       is an investigation and not in nature of audit report.

4. It is example of failure of internal controls of the firm. The internal control has
       not operated due to collusion between employees which is a limitation of
       internal control itself. The auditor has relied upon internal controls. It is very
       nature of financial reporting that management is responsible for devising
       suitable internal controls. This is an inherent limitation of audit.

5. Such report would be in nature of "review". However, auditors would have to
       obtain sufficient appropriate evidence.

6. He is required to document how alternative procedures performed achieve
       the purpose of required procedure. Reason for departure has to be
       documented unless it is clear. His report should draw attention to such
       departure.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
