CHAPTER  9

SPECIAL FEATURES
OF AUDIT OF
DIFFERENT TYPES OF
ENTITIES

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to:

 Understand about Government audit, duties of the Comptroller and

       Auditor General of India

 Understand the procedures to be adopted for auditing of Not-for-profit

       Organizations (NGOs), Charitable Institutions.

 Gain knowledge of auditing procedure of sole trader, firm, educational

       institutions, hospitals, clubs, cinema, hotels, etc.

 Learn the audit procedure of hire purchase and leasing company

       accounts.

 Identify the audit procedures of Government, Local Bodies, Cooperative

       Societies, LLPs, Trusts & Societies.

 Understand practicality of above concepts using examples and case

       studies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.2                                AUDITING AND ETHICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

                         Trusts &                  Government
                        Societies                      Audit

Co-operative                                                         NGOs
    Society
                                                                                   Local
                                                                                  Bodies

 Hire Purchase                Special Features                                             Sole
   & Leasing                     of Audit of                                              Trader
   Companies
                              Different types                                                 Firm
Charitable                        of Entities
Institutions

Hospital                                                                                  LLP

                Educational                                                Hotel
                Institutions

                                   Cinema                      Club
                                     Hall

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India        Examine the constitution of the organisation                                                  Constitution of the              Audit of Different Entities                                                    SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT
                                                                                                                                                   organisation                     (major points that must be kept in mind while performing the
                                                   Examine the bye laws or rules and regulations or trust                                                                       audit of Educational Institution, Charitable Institutions, Cinema,
                                                                                   deed                                                                                                                                                             TYPES OF ENTITIES
                                                                                                                                                                            Hospital etc., are
                                                          Examine the powers of the members of the                                                                                                                                                                     9.3
                                                                 management and other officers

                                                   Examine the minute books of managing committees
                                                   and of members general meeting as the case may be

                                                                                         Evaluate the internal Control System in the organisation

                                                                                             Examine the accounting policies followed and the
                                                                                                          accounting records maintained

                                                                                            Check the various receipts of the organisation in the
                                                                                         form of fees, rent, income on investment, donations and

                                                                                                                          grants
                                                                                          Check the various expenditures of the organization like
                                                                                         Salary, Rent, General Expenses etc. Verification of assets

                                                                                                                      and liabilities
9.4  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Scrambling for his television remote one day, Sameer accidentally pushed button of
"Sansad TV". Although not fond of keenly watching Parliamentary debates, his
attention was drawn to pandemonium being caused in one Houses of Parliament
over a report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). Anxious to
know about importance of reports of CAG, he wanted to first know about this
constitutional office. What is nature of duties of Comptroller and Auditor General
of India as envisaged in Constitution of India? What makes position of CAG
unique?

Astonished to learn that Comptroller and Auditor General is known as "Supreme
Audit Institution of India", he wanted to know more about scope of duties
performed by such an important institution. Not only audits of receipts and
expenditure of Union of India and States are performed by CAG of India, this
institution is also responsible for audit of receipts and expenditure of bodies
mainly financed by Union or State Revenues.

Besides above, it is responsible for ensuring that public funds are being collected
and used effectively and efficiently. Does CAG have a role to play in audits of
government companies? What are law provisions in this regard? He was also
thinking that Constitution must have included provisions to ensure independence
of such an institution. What are such provisions?

Knowing importance of local bodies governing cities, Sameer also wanted to
know how control over expenditure of local bodies is exercised. Who exercises
such control and what are main objectives of such an audit? How financial
administration of such urban local bodies is run?

Are there some other sets of entities which merit special audit considerations by
virtue of their nature or structure? For example, an NGO works in a totally
different environment. It may work in social or environmental areas. What critical
points are to be kept in mind by auditor of an NGO? Similarly, clubs, hotels and
hospitals may involve audit considerations peculiar to their nature of working.

Sameer had also noticed sign boards of some organizations with LLP written at
the end. What does it denote? How does it differ from a partnership firm? What
are regulatory requirements in respect of LLP? As an auditor, what special
considerations apply in case of audit of LLP?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT             9.5

TYPES OF ENTITIES

    1. GOVERNMENT AUDIT

1.1 Background

Government Audit is as old as organised governments and has fairly long pedigree
even in developing countries. The concept, content and scope of government audit
have developed in tune with the political, social and economic development of the
countries. It has also responded to the needs of the administration. It aims to
ensure accountability of the executive in respect of public revenue and expenditure.
Primarily, the Parliament and in case of States, the State legislatures control all
government expenditure through insistence upon demand for grants. The main
idea underlying this control is that no expenditure can be incurred unless it has
been voted upon by the Parliament or State Legislatures and funds for every
such expenditure must be provided from out of the Consolidated Fund of India
or of the State.

(As per Article 266, the Consolidated Fund of India consists of all the revenue
received from direct and indirect taxes, all the loans taken by the Govt. of
India and all the amount of repayment of loans received by the Govt. of India)

After the expenditure has been incurred and the accounts are closed, the
Appropriation Accounts are prepared which are scrutinised by the Public Accounts
Committee (The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) is a committee of selected
members of parliament, constituted by the Parliament of India, for the purpose of
auditing the revenue and the expenditure of the Government of India). Thus,
Parliamentary or Legislative control is exercised before spending and after the
expenditure is actually incurred.

Since independence there has been a tremendous spurt in governmental activities
with the attendant increase in expenditure, revenue and capital, and in receipts and
borrowings to match the expenditure. Government has entered the business field
and government in business is not the same as government administering law and
order and attending to regulatory functions. Independent India witnessed a steady
growth of state commercial enterprise. The change in the character of government
and the complex nature of its activities, including regulatory functions in an
international environment called for a change in the nature and scope of audit.
Audit has evolved from accountancy and regularity check to evaluation of the end
results of the operations of government.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.6  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Initially, government auditing in India as elsewhere was primarily expenditure-
oriented. Gradually, audit of receipts-tax and non-tax was taken up. With the rapid
growth of public enterprises, another major area of specialisation, i.e., commercial
audit, came into being. There are also a large number of non-commercial
autonomous bodies financed by government in diverse fields of development and
of academic study and scientific or social research which are also required to be
audited from the viewpoint of public accountability.

Government audit has not only adopted the basic essentials of auditing as known and
practised in the profession to suit the requirements of governmental transactions but
has also added new concepts, techniques and procedures to the audit profession.

The U.N. Handbook on Government Auditing and Developing Countries defines
government auditing in a comprehensive manner which is as follows:

Government auditing is

 the objective, systematic, professional and independent examination

 of financial, administrative and other operations

 of a public entity

 made subsequently to their execution

 for the purpose of evaluating and verifying them,

 presenting a report containing explanatory comments on audit findings
       together with conclusions and recommendations for future actions

 by the responsible officials

 and in the case of examination of financial statements, expressing the
       appropriate professional opinion regarding the fairness of the presentation.

OBJECTIVES :-

(a) Accounting for Public Funds:-Government audit serves as a mechanism or
       process for public accounting of government funds.

(b) Appraisal of Government policies:-It also provides public accounting of the
       operational, management, programme and policy aspects of public
       administration as well as accountability of the officials administering them.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT             9.7

TYPES OF ENTITIES

(c) Base for Corrective actions:-Audit observations based on factual data
       collection also serve to highlight the lapses of the lower hierarchy, thus helping
       supervisory level officers to take corrective measures.

Administrative accountability:-Government audit is neither equipped nor
intended to function as an investigating agency, to pursue every irregularity or
misdemeanour to its logical end. The main objective of audit is a combination of
ensuring accountability of administration to legislature and functioning as an aid
to administration. In India, the function of Government Audit is discharged by the
independent statutory authority of the Comptroller and Auditor General through
the agency of the Indian Audit and Accounts Department. Audit is a necessary
function to ensure accountability of the executive to Parliament, and within the
executives of the spending agencies to the sanctioning or controlling authorities.
The purpose or objectives of audit need to be tested at the touchstone of public
accountability. The Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG), in the discharge of his
functions, watches that the various authorities act in regard to financial matters in
accordance with the Constitution and the laws made by Parliament, and conform
to the rules or orders made thereunder.

1.2 Legal Framework and Comptroller & Auditor General

The Constitution of India contains specific provisions regarding the appointment,
salary and duties and powers of the C&AG.

1. APPOINTMENT & REMOVAL

The Constitution guarantees the independence of the C&AG of India by prescribing
that he shall be appointed by the President of India and shall not be removed
from office except on the ground of proven mis-behaviour or incapacity. As in the
case of a Judge of the Supreme Court, he can be removed only when each House of
Parliament decides to do so by a majority of not less than 2/3rd of the members of
the House present and voting. The Parliament is competent to make laws to
determine salary and other conditions of service and they cannot be varied to his
disadvantage after his appointment. The Constitution further provides that the
conditions of service of person serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts
Department and the administrative powers of the C&AG shall be determined by the
President after consultation with him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

2. TENURE

The Comptroller & Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act,
1971 passed in pursuance of the provisions of the Constitution lays down a fixed
tenure of the office prescribing that he shall be paid a salary which is equal to the
salary of the Judge of the Supreme Court thereby further strengthening his
independence.

3. VARIOUS CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

       i. Article 149 states that the C&AG shall perform such duties and exercise
               such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States
               and of any other authority or body as may be prescribed by or under any
               law made by the Parliament. The Comptroller & Auditor General's (Duties,
               Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 defines these functions and
               powers in detail.

       ii. Article 150 of the Constitution provides that the accounts of the Union
               and of the States shall be kept in such form as the President may on the
               advice of the C&AG prescribe.

       iii. Article 151 requires that the reports of the C&AG relating to the
               accounts of the Union/State shall be submitted to the
               President/Governor who shall cause them to be laid before House of
               Parliament/State Legislature.

1.3 Comptroller and Auditor General's -- Duties and
      Powers

The Comptroller & Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service)
Act, 1971 defines functions and powers in detail. The relevant provisions are
discussed hereunder--

Duties of the C&AG:

(i) Compile and submit Accounts of Union and States - The Comptroller and
       Auditor General shall be responsible for compiling the accounts of the Union
       and of each State from the initial and subsidiary accounts rendered to the
       audit and accounts offices under his control by treasuries, offices or
       departments responsible for the keeping of such account. The Comptroller
       and Auditor General shall, from the accounts compiled by him or [by the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT             9.9

TYPES OF ENTITIES

       Government or any other person responsible in that behalf] prepare in each
       accounts (including, in the case of accounts compiled by him, appropriation
       accounts) showing under the respective heads the annual receipts and
       disbursements for the purpose of the Union, of each State and of each Union
       Territory having a Legislative Assembly, and shall submit those accounts to
       the President or the Governor of a State or Administrator of the Union
       Territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, on or before such
       dates as he may, with the concurrence of the Government concerned,
       determine.

       NOTE :- The C&AG Act of 1971 has provisions for relieving him of this
       responsibility to give information and render assistance to the Union and
       States: The Comptroller and Auditor General shall, in so far as the accounts, for
       the compilation or keeping of which he is responsible, enable him so to do,
       give to the Union Government, to the State Government or to the
       Governments of Union Territories having Legislative Assemblies, as the case
       may be, such information as they may, from time to time, require and render
       such assistance in the preparation of the annual financial statements as they
       may reasonably ask for.

(ii) General Provisions Relating to Audit - It shall be the duty of the
       Comptroller and Auditor General--

       (a) to audit and report on all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
               India and of each State and of each Union Territory having a Legislative
               Assembly and to ascertain whether the moneys shown in the accounts
               as having been disbursed were legally available for and applicable to the
               service or purpose to which they have been applied or charged and
               whether the expenditure conforms to the authority which governs it;

       (b) to audit and report all transactions of the Union and of the States
               relating to Contingency Funds and Public Accounts;

       (c) to audit and report on all trading, manufacturing and profit and loss
               accounts and balance-sheets and other subsidiary accounts kept in any
               department of the Union or of a State.

(iii) Audit of Receipts and Expenditure - Where anybody or authority is
       substantially financed by grants or loans from the Consolidated Fund of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.10  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       India or of any State or of any Union Territory having a Legislative Assembly,
       the Comptroller and Auditor General shall, subject to the provisions of any
       law for the time being in force applicable to the body or authority, as the case
       may be, audit all receipts and expenditure of that body or authority and to
       report on the receipts and expenditure audited by him.

       Meaning of Substantially financed :- Where the grant or loan to a body or
       authority from the Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union
       Territory having a Legislative Assembly in a financial year is not less than ` 25
       lakhs and the amount of such grant or loan is not less than 75% of the total
       expenditure of that body or authority, such body or authority shall be deemed,
       for this purpose to be substantially financed by such grants or loans as the
       case may be.

(iv) Audit of Grants or Loans - Where any grant or loan is given for any specific
       purpose from the Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union
       Territory having a Legislative Assembly to any authority or body, not being a
       foreign State or international organisation, the Comptroller and Auditor
       General shall scrutinise the procedures by which the sanctioning authority
       satisfies itself as to the fulfillment of the conditions subject to which such
       grants or loans were given and shall for this purpose have right of access,
       after giving reasonable previous notice, to the books and accounts of that
       authority or body.

(v) Audit of Receipts of Union or States - It shall be the duty of the Comptroller
       and Auditor General to audit all receipts which are payable into the
       Consolidated Fund of India and of each State and of each Union Territory
       having a Legislative Assembly and to satisfy himself that the rules and
       procedures in that behalf are designed to secure an effective check on the
       assessment, collection and proper allocation of revenue and are being duly
       observed and to make for this purpose such examination of the accounts as
       he thinks fit and report thereon.

(vi) Audit of Accounts of Stores and Inventory - The Comptroller and Auditor
       General shall have authority to audit and report on the accounts of stores and
       inventory kept in any office or department of the Union or of a State.

(vii) Audit of Government Companies and Corporations - The duties and
       powers of the Comptroller and Auditor General in relation to the audit of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT             9.11

TYPES OF ENTITIES

       accounts of government companies shall be performed and exercised by him
       in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. The
       Comptroller and Auditor- General of India shall appoint the auditor under
       section 139(5) or 139(7) (i.e. appointment of First Auditor or Subsequent
       Auditor) and direct such auditor the manner in which the accounts of the
       Government company are required to be audited and thereupon the auditor
       so appointed shall submit a copy of the audit report to the Comptroller and
       Auditor-General of India which, among other things, include the directions, if
       any, issued by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, the action taken
       thereon and its impact on the accounts and financial statement of the
       company.

Powers of C&AG

The C&AG Act gives the following powers to the C&AG in connection with the
performance of his duties-

(a) To inspect any office of accounts under the control of the Union or a State
       Government including office responsible for the creation of the initial or
       subsidiary accounts.

(b) To require that any accounts, books, papers and other documents which deal
       with or are otherwise relevant to the transactions under audit, be sent to
       specified places.

(c) To put such questions or make such observations as he may consider
       necessary to the person in charge of the office and to call for such information
       as he may require for the preparation of any account or report which is his
       duty to prepare.

(d) In carrying out the audit, the C&AG has the power to dispense with any part of
       detailed audit of any accounts or class of transactions and to apply such
       limited checks in relation to such accounts or transactions as he may
       determine.

1.4 Expenditure Audit

The audit of government expenditure is one of the major components of
government audit. The basic standards set for audit of expenditure are to ensure
that there is provision of funds authorised by competent authority fixing the limits

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.12  AUDITING AND ETHICS

within which ex-penditure can be incurred. These standards are--

(i) that the expenditure incurred conforms to the relevant provisions of the
       statutory enactment and in accordance with the Financial Rules and Regulations
       framed by the competent authority. Such an audit is called as the audit against
       `rules and orders'.

(ii) that there is sanction, either special or general, accorded by competent authority
       authorising the expenditure. Such an audit is called as the audit of sanctions.

(iii) that there is a provision of funds out of which expenditure can be incurred and
       the same has been authorised by competent authority. Such an audit is called as
       audit against provision of funds.

(iv) that the expenditure is incurred with due regard to broad and general principles
       of financial propriety. Such an audit is also called as propriety audit.

(v) that the various programmes, schemes and projects where large financial
       expenditure has been incurred are being run economically and are yielding
       results expected of them. Such an audit is termed as the performance audit.

Each of the above audits is discussed in detail in the following paragraphs.

(1) Audit against Rules & Orders - Audit against rules and orders aims to ensure
that the expenditure conforms to the relevant provisions of the Constitution and of
the laws and rules made thereunder. It also seeks to satisfy that the expenditure is in
accordance with the financial rules, regulations and orders issued by a competent
authority. Audit of expenditure against regularity is of a quasi-judicial type of work
performed by the audit authorities. It involves interpretation of the Constitution,
statutes, rules, regulations and orders. The final power of interpretation of these,
however, does not vest with the C&AG.

These rules, regulations and orders against which regularity audit is conducted
mainly fall under the following categories:

(i) Rules and orders regulating the powers to incur and sanction expenditure
       from the Consolidated Fund of India or of a State (and the Contingency Fund
       of India or of a State);

(ii) Rules and orders dealing with the mode of presentation of claims against
       government, withdrawing moneys from the Consolidated Fund, Contingency
       Fund and Public Accounts of the Government of the India and of the States,
       and in general the financial rules prescribing the detailed procedure to be

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.13
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

       followed by government servants in dealing with government transactions;
       and

(iii) Rules and orders regulating the conditions of service, pay and allowances,
       and pensions of government servants.

It is the function of the executive government to frame rules, regulations and
orders, which are to be observed by its subordinate authorities. The job of audit is
to see that these rules, regulations and orders are applied properly by the
subordinate authorities. It is, however, not the function of audit to prescribe what
such rules, regulations and orders shall be.

But, it is the function of audit to carry out examination of the various rules, regulations and
orders issued by the executive authorities to see that:

(a) they are not inconsistent with any provisions of the Constitution or any laws
       made thereunder;

(b) they are consistent with the essential requirements of audit and accounts as
       determined by the C&AG;

(c) they do not come in conflict with the orders of, or rules made by, any higher
       authority; and

(d) in case they have not been separately approved by competent authority, the
       issuing authority possesses the necessary rule-making power.

(2) Audit of sanctions - The auditor has to ensure that each item of expenditure
is covered by a sanction, either general or special, of the competent authority. The
audit of sanctions is directed both in respect of ensuring that the expenditure is
properly covered by a sanction, and also to satisfy that the authority sanctioning it
is competent for the purpose by virtue of the powers vested in it by the provisions
of the Constitution and of the law, rules or orders made thereunder, or by the rules
of delegation of financial powers made by an authority competent to do so.

(3) Audit against provision of funds - Audit against provision of funds aims at
ascertaining that the expenditure incurred has been on the purpose for which the
grant and appropriation had been provided and that the amount of such
expenditure does not exceed the appropriation made.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.14  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(4) Propriety audit - According to `Propriety audit', the auditors try to bring
out cases of improper, avoidable, or ineffective expenditure even though the
expenditure has been incurred in conformity with the existing rules and regulations.
With the passage of time, it was felt that regularity audit alone was not sufficient
to protect properly the public interest in the spending of money by the executive
authorities. A transaction may satisfy all the requirements of regularity audit insofar
as the various formalities regarding rules and regulations are concerned, but may
still be highly wasteful. e.g.:- A building may be constructed for installing a
telephone exchange but may not be used for the same purpose resulting in
unproductive expenditure or a school building may be constructed but used after
five years of its completion is a case of avoidable expenditure.

Audit should, therefore, try to secure a reasonably high standard of public financial
morality by looking into the wisdom, faithfulness and economy of transactions.
These considerations have led to the evolution of audit against propriety which is
now being combined by the audit authorities with their routine function of
regularity audit. It is hard to frame any precise rules for regulating the course of
audit against propriety. Such an objective of audit depends for its acceptance on
its appeal to the common sense and straight logic of the auditors and of those
whose financial transactions are subjected to propriety audit.

However, some general principles have been laid down in the Audit Code, which
have for long been recognised as standards of financial propriety. Audit against
propriety seeks to ensure that expenditure conforms to these principles which have
been stated as follows:

(a) The expenditure should not be prima facie more than the occasion demands.
       Every public officer is expected to exercise the same vigilance in respect of
       expenditure incurred from public moneys as a person of ordinary prudence
       would exercise in respect of expenditure of his own money.

(b) No authority should exercise its powers of sanctioning expenditure to pass
       an order which will be directly or indirectly to its own advantage.

(c) Public moneys should not be utilised for the benefit of a particular person or
       section of the community unless:

       (i) the amount of expenditure involved is insignificant; or

       (ii) a claim for the amount could be enforced in a Court of law; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.15
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

       (iii) the expenditure is in pursuance of a recognised policy or custom; and

       (iv) the amount of allowances, such as travelling allowances, granted to
               meet expenditure of a particular type should be so regulated that the
               allowances are not, on the whole, sources of profit to the recipients.

Note :- It is the responsibility of the executive departments to enforce economy in
public expenditure. The function of audit is to bring to the notice of the proper
authorities of wastefulness in public administration and cases of improper,
avoidable and ineffective/unproductive expenditure

(5) Performance audit - The scope of audit has been extended to cover
efficiency, economy and effectiveness audit or performance audit, or full scope
audit:-
Efficiency audit looks into whether the various schemes/projects are executed and
their operations conducted economically and whether they are yielding the results

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.16  AUDITING AND ETHICS

expected of them, i.e., the relationship between goods and services produced and
resources used to produce them; and examination aimed to find out the extent to
which operations are carried out in an economical and efficient manner.

Economy audit looks into whether government have acquired the financial, human
and physical resources in an economical manner, and whether the sanctioning and
spending authorities have observed economy.

Effectiveness audit is an appraisal of the performance of programmes, schemes,
projects with reference to the overall targeted objectives as well as efficiency of the
means adopted for the attainment of the objectives.

Efficiency- cum-performance audit, wherever used, is an objective examination of
the financial and operational performance of an organisation, programme,
authority or function and is oriented towards identifying opportunities for greater
economy, and effectiveness.

The procedure for conducting performance audit covers

 identification of topic,

 preliminary study,

 planning ,

 execution of audit, and

 reporting.

1.5 Audit of Receipts

The audit of receipts is neither all pervasive or as old as audit of expenditure but
has come to stay in some countries. Such an audit provides for checking;

(i) whether all revenues or other debts due to government have been correctly
       assessed, realised and credited to government account by the designated
       authorities;

(ii) whether adequate regulations and procedures have been framed by the
       department/agency concerned to secure an effective check on assessment,
       collection and proper allocation of cases;

(iii) whether such regulations and procedures are actually being carried out;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.17
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(iv) whether adequate checks are imposed to ensure the prompt detection and
       investigation of irregularities, double refunds, fraudulent or forged refund
       vouchers or other loss of revenue through fraud or willful omission or
       negligence to levy or collect taxes or to issue refunds; and

(v) review of systems and procedures to see that the internal procedures
       adequately secure correct and regular accounting of demands collection and
       refunds and pursuant of dues up to final settlement and to suggest
       improvement. The basic principle of audit of receipts is that it is more
       important to look at the general than on the particular, though individual
       cases of assessment, demand, collection, refund, etc. are important within the
       area of test check. A review of the judicial decisions taken by tax authorities is
       done to judge the effectiveness of the assessment procedure.

(vi) The extent and quantum of audit required to be done under each category of
       audit are determined by the C&AG. These are neither negotiable nor
       questioned. The prescribed extent and quantum of audit are structured in
       accordance with the design of test check, random sampling, general review,
       in-depth study of specified areas, etc. as may be warranted by the nature of
       transactions, its importance in the scheme of activities of a department and
       the totality of its transactions, the frequency of check and total plan of audit
       to be executed during a period. Institutional mechanism provides for
       primary check by the auditor, test check by the supervisor and control
       and direction by the group leader. Planning, executing and reporting of
       work is directed and monitored at middle and top levels of the audit hierarchy.
       There are built-in arrangements within the C&AG to ensure that the work
       assigned to each employee is carried out as prescribed. The audit is conducted
       both centrally where accounts and original vouchers are kept and locally
       where the drawing and disbursing functions are performed depending on the
       organisational and institutional arrangements obtaining.

1.6 Audit of Stores and Inventories

Audit of the accounts of stores and inventories has been developed as a part of
expenditure audit with reference to the duties and responsibilities entrusted to
C&AG. Audit is conducted :-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.18  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 to ascertain whether the Regulations governing purchase, receipt and issue,
       custody, sale and inventory taking of stores are well devised and properly
       carried out.

 to bring to the notice of the government any deficiencies in quantities of
       stores held or any defects in the system of control.

 to verify that the purchases are properly sanctioned, made economical and in
       accordance with the Rules for purchase laid down by the competent authority.

 to ensure that the prices paid are reasonable and are in agreement with those
       shown in the contract for the supply of stores, and that the certificates of
       quality and quantity are furnished by the inspecting and receiving units. Cases
       of uneconomical purchase of stores and losses attributable to defective or
       inferior quality of stores are specifically brought by the audit.

 to check the accounts of receipts, issues and balances regarding accuracy,
       correctness and reasonableness of balances in inventories with particular
       reference to the specified norms for level of consumption of inventory
       holding. Any excess or idle inventory is specifically mentioned in the report
       and periodical verification of inventory is also conducted to ensure their
       existence. When priced accounts are maintained, the auditor should see that
       the prices charged are reasonable and have been reviewed from time to time.
       The valuation of the inventories is seen carefully so that the value accounts
       tally with the physical accounts and that adjustment of profits or losses due
       to revaluation, inventory taking or other causes is carried out.

1.7 Audit of Commercial Accounts

Public enterprises are required to maintain commercial accounts and are generally
classified under three categories--

(a) departmental enterprises engaged in commercial and trading operations,
       which are subject to the same laws, financial and other regulations as other
       government departments and agencies;

(b) statutory bodies, corporations, created by specific statutes mostly financed
       by government in the form of loans, grants, etc.; and

(c) government companies set up under the Companies Act, 2013.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.19
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

The audit of :-

· departmental concerns is undertaken in the same manner as any
       department of government where commercial accounts are kept.

· statutory bodies or corporations depends on the nature and type of the
       statute governing the bodies or corporations. Financial / accounts audit is
       conducted by the C&AG, and where compilation of accounts is vested with
       the C&AG, functions, norms and standards of works usually followed by the
       professional auditors are adopted mutatis mutandis.

· government companies is conducted by their own auditors under the statute
       appointed by C&AG. In addition, the C&AG conducts a supplementary test
       audit of the accounts, as well as periodical financial audit and appraisal of
       performance. The C&AG also issues direction to the company auditors for
       reporting on specific aspects of their audit work. These are reviewed, and
       condensed in the audit reports to the government/legislatures. C&AG has
       adopted the mechanism of an Audit Board-comprising of representatives of
       the audit and nominees of government including functional specialists to
       process reviews or appraisals on performance.

Role of C&AG is prescribed under sub section (5), (6) and (7) of section 143 of
the Companies Act, 2013.

(1) Power to appoint Government Company Auditor :- Section 143(5) of the
Act states that, in the case of a Government company or any other company owned
or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central Government, or by any State
Government or Governments, or partly by the Central Government and partly by
one or more State Governments, the comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall
appoint the auditor under sub-section (5) or sub-section (7) of section 139 i.e.
appointment of First Auditor or Subsequent Auditor and direct such auditor the
manner in which the accounts of the Government company are required to be
audited and thereupon the auditor so appointed shall submit a copy of the audit
report to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India which, among other things,
include the directions, if any, issued by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India, the action taken thereon and its impact on the accounts and financial
statement of the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.20  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(2) Power to conduct Supplementary Audit & comment thereupon :-The
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall within 60 days from the date of
receipt of the audit report have a right to,

(a) conduct a supplementary audit under section 143(6)(a), of the financial
       statement of the company by such person or persons as he may authorize in
       this behalf; and for the purposes of such audit, require information or
       additional information to be furnished to any person or persons, so
       authorised, on such matters, by such person or persons, and in such form, as
       the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may direct; and

(b) comment upon or supplement such audit report under section 143(6)(b).
       Any comments given by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India upon,
       or supplement to, the audit report shall be sent by the company to every
       person entitled to copies of audited financial statements under sub-section
       of section 136 i.e. every member of the company, to every trustee for the
       debenture-holder of any debentures issued by the company, and to all
       persons other than such member or trustee, being the person so entitled and
       also be placed before the annual general meeting of the company at the same
       time and in the same manner as the audit report.

(3) Test Audit: Further, without prejudice to the provisions relating to audit and
auditor, the Comptroller and Auditor- General of India may, in case of any company
covered under sub-section (5) or sub-section (7) of section 139, if he considers
necessary, by an order, cause test audit to be conducted of the accounts of such
company and the provisions of section 19A of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971, shall apply to the
report of such test audit.

As stated above, in the case of a government company, audit is conducted by
professional auditors appointed on the advice of the C&AG and the later is
authorised under section 143 of the Companies Act, 2013 to conduct supplementary
or test audit.

The C&AG shall direct the manner in which the company's accounts shall be audited
by the statutory auditors and give such auditors instructions in regard to any matter
relating to the performance of his functions as such. The directions under section
143(6) broadly covers the system of book-keeping and accounts, internal control
etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.21
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

The C&AG has power to conduct a supplementary or test audit of the company's
accounts by such person as he may authorise in this behalf and for the purposes of
such audit require information or additional information to be furnished to any
person or persons so authorised on such matters by such person or persons and in
such form as the C&AG may by general or special order, direct.

The statutory auditors shall submit a copy of their audit report to the C&AG who
shall have a right to comment upon or supplement the audit report submitted by
the statutory auditors in such manner as he may think fit. Section 134(3) of the
Companies Act, 2013 imposes a duty on the board of directors of a company to give
an explanation or comments on every reservation, or adverse remarks or disclaimer
contained in the auditors' report and secretarial audit report of the Company
Secretary in practice. In the absence of similar provisions requiring the company to
give reply on the reservation made by the C&AG, the board of directors of such a
company is not bound to give information or explanation in respect of such
comments.

The general standards, principles, techniques and procedures for audit adopted by
the C&AG are a mixture of government audit and commercial audit as known and
practiced by professional auditors. The concepts of autonomy and accountability of
the institution / bodies / corporations / companies have influenced the nature and
scope of audit in applying the conventional audit from the angle of economy,
efficiency and effectiveness.

1.8 Reporting Procedures

The effectiveness of an audit depends on reporting results to the proper authority
so that appropriate action may be taken to rectify the irregularities or impropriety
where possible or to prevent re-occurrence. The right as also the obligation to
report on the results of audit findings is inherent to the institution of the Auditor
General and is usually safeguarded in the Constitution and related enactments.
Article 151 of the Indian Constitution enjoins that the C&AG shall report on the
accounts of the Union and of each of the States to the President or the Governor
concern and the latter shall cause the report to be laid before the legislatures. The
reports should not only be presented to the legislatures but thereafter also
publicised adequately in order to create a proper climate of public opinion for
taking remedial action where necessary, on the findings of the Auditor General. This

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.22  AUDITING AND ETHICS

may also constitute a more effective safeguard in the future.

In India, the reporting is factual and the conclusions are left to be drawn by the
reader. This is presumably to ensure total objectivity. Nothing debars C&AG from
making recommendations in the audit report but traditionally this has been left to
be done by the Public Accounts Committee.

Test Your Understanding 1

It is the duty of Comptroller and Auditor General of India to audit and report on all
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and of each State and of each
Union Territory having a Legislative Assembly and to ascertain whether the moneys
shown in the accounts as having been disbursed were legally available for and
applicable to the service or purpose to which they have been applied or charged
and whether the expenditure conforms to the authority which governs it. Discuss,
in above context, what is understood by "Consolidated Fund of India"? What is its
importance?

    2. AUDIT OF LOCAL BODIES

2.1 Background

(1) A Municipality can be defined as a unit of local self-government in an urban
area. By the term `local self-government' is ordinarily understood the
administration of a locality ­ a village, a town, a city or any other area smaller than
a state ­ by a body representing the local inhabitants, possessing fairly large
autonomy, raising at least a part of its revenue through local taxation and spending
its income on services which are regarded as local and, therefore, distinct from state
and central services.

The discussion in following paragraphs is based on an article "Audit of
Municipal Administration" by R. Chandra Sekharan.

By 1947, the year of independence of India, most of the urban and semi-urban
areas had been constituted into municipalities of one kind or another. Among them
were the premier corporations of Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata each with a special
kind of constitutional structure, better financial resources and subject to less state
control than other municipal bodies. The service which the local bodies had to render

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.23
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

was restricted to education, public health, sanitation, medical relief, roads and a few
public works. This was so because these bodies were considered to be inefficient
and they lacked adequate financial resources. These bodies derived their revenues
from a number of sources ­ taxes on property, taxes on trade, taxes on persons;
fees and licences, non- tax resources such as rent of land, houses, income from
commercial undertakings; government grants, etc.

(2) Municipal government in India covers five distinct types of urban local
authorities-
 the municipal corporations,

 the municipal councils,

 the notified area committees,

 the town area committees and

 the cantonment committees.

(3) Municipal authorities are endowed with specific local functions covering
(a) regulatory,

(b) maintenance and

(c) development activities.

(4) Expenditure incurred by the municipalities and corporations can be
broadly classified under the following heads:
(a) general administration and revenue collection,

(b) public health,

(c) public safety,

(d) education,

(e) public works, and

(f) others such as interest payments, etc.

(5) Property taxes and octroi are the major sources of revenue of the
municipal authorities; other municipal taxes are profession tax, non-mechanised
vehicles tax, taxes on advertisements, taxes on animals and boats, tolls, show-tax,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.24  AUDITING AND ETHICS

etc. The taxation powers of the corporations are confined to a few items and are of
a generally compulsive nature; on the other hand, the tax powers of other types of
urban local authorities cover a wider range, optional in nature and subject to a
procedure for their imposition requiring the final sanction of the state
governments.

(6) Local bodies may receive different types of grants from the state
administration as well. Broadly, the revenue grants are of three categories:

(a) General purpose grants: These are primarily intended to substantially bridge
       the gap between the needs and resources of the local bodies.

(b) Specific purpose grants: These grants which are tied to the provision of
       certain services or performance of certain tasks.

(c) Statutory and compensatory grants: These grants, under various enactments,
       are given to local bodies as compensation on account of loss of any revenue on
       taking over a tax by state government from local government.

2.2 Financial Administration

It would be imminent on the part of the auditor to understand financial
administration of local bodies before embarking upon the audit. Some of the
aspects are as under:

(a) Budgetary Procedure: This is geared to subserve the twin considerations of
financial accountability and control of expenditure. The main objective is to ensure
that funds are raised and moneys are spent by the executive departments in
accordance with the rules and regulations and within the limits of sanction and
authorisation by the legislature or council. Budget preparation is usually the
occasion for determining the levels of taxation and rates and the ceilings on
expenditure.

Municipal budget formats and heads of accounts vary from state to state. There are
variations between the corporation and municipalities. One important feature of
the municipal budgets is that there is no strict separation between revenue and
capital items; usually there is a `head' called extraordinary items which cover most
of the capital transactions. There are, however, a number of special funds (e.g.
roads) or in some cases separate budgets for specific municipal functions (e.g.
education) or enterprise activities (e.g., water supply and sanitation, transport,
electricity, etc.)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.25
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(b) Expenditure Control: The system of financial control existing in the state and
central government level is conditioned by the fact that there is a clear demarcation
between the legislature and executive. The integration of legislation and executive
powers in the municipal council makes it difficult for its executive to function as its
inquisitorial body as well. Moreover the separation of executive powers and
functions in municipal government cannot accommodate the existence of an
independent finance officer responsible to the municipal council or its executive
committee. This leaves the system of external audit by state government as the only
instrument of controlling municipal expenditure.

(c) Accounting System: Municipal accounting and budget format have been
criticised as neither simple nor comprehensible, sometimes providing inadequate
information and at other times a surfeit of information. Both these situations are
not conducive to a proper system of managementinformation.

2.3 Objective of Audit of Local Bodies

The external control of municipal expenditure is exercised by the state governments
through the appointment of auditors to examine municipal accounts. However, the
municipal corporations of Delhi, Mumbai and a few others have powers to appoint
their own auditors for regular external audit.

The important objectives of audit are:

(a) reporting on the fairness of the content and presentation of financial
       statements;

(b) reporting upon the strengths and weaknesses of systems of financial control;

(c) reporting on the adherence to legal and/or administrative requirements;

(d) reporting upon whether value is being fully received on money spent; and

(e) detection and prevention of error, fraud and misuse of resources.

Audit is another method of financial control on local governments. This provision is
coupled with the privilege of ultra vires. An action of the local authority if it is beyond
legal authority can result in `surcharge' by audit. This procedure is a legacy of colonial
days and even in England it is being resorted to less and less. This may well be
because of the increasing competence of the local government authorities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.26  AUDITING AND ETHICS

In addition to the external audit, it is also opined by the learned author that there
should be a system of internal audit in all municipal institutions. Internal audit
should be provided by the institutions' own staff. It should be performed on a
continuous basis according to a well- defined programme. The external auditor
should be able to rely upon the work of the internal audit as forming part of a
complete system of internal financial control. Where there is no internal audit, as
may happen in the case of small or poorly staffed municipalities, the external auditor
himself has to do detailed checking. As described under government audit above,
increasing attention is being given, to what is described as `value for money' audit.
This kind of audit focuses upon assessment of whether urban institutions are
fulfilling their responsibilities with efficiency, economy and effectiveness
(sometimes known as `the three Es').

2.4 Audit Programme for Local Bodies

(i) APPOINTMENT:-The Local Fund Audit Wing of the State Govt. is generally
       in-charge of the audit of municipal accounts. Sometimes bigger municipal
       corporations e.g. Delhi, Mumbai etc. have power to appoint their own
       auditors for regular external audit. So the auditor should ensure his
       appointment.

(ii) AUDITOR'S CONCERNS:-The auditor while auditing the local bodies should
       report on the

       · fairness of the contents and presentation of financial statements,

       · the strengths and weaknesses of system of financial control,

       · the adherence to legal and/or administrative requirements;

       · whether value is being fully received on money spent.

       His objective should be to detect errors and fraud and misuse of resources.

(iii) RULES & REGULATIONS:- The auditor should ensure that the expenditure
       incurred conforms to the relevant provisions of the law and is in accordance
       with the financial rules and regulations framed by the competent authority.

(iv) AUTHORISATIONS:- He should ensure that all types of sanctions, either
       special or general, accorded by the competent authority.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.27
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(v) PROVISIONING:- He should ensure that there is a provision of funds and the
       expenditure is incurred from the provision and the same has been authorized
       by the competent authority.

(vi) PERFORMANCE:- The auditor should check that the different schemes,
       programmes and projects, where large financial expenditure has been
       incurred, are running economically and getting the expected results.

    3. AUDIT OF NON - GOVERNMENTAL
          ORGANISATION (NGO'S)

3.1 Background

(1) NGOs can be defined as non-profit making organisations which raise funds
from members, donors or contributors apart from receiving donation of time,
energy and skills for achieving their social objectives like imparting education,
providing medical facilities, economic assistance to poor, managing disasters and
emergent situations.

                                            Source of image: crossbarriers.org

(2) Therefore, this definition of NGO would include religious organisations,
voluntary health and welfare agencies, charitable organisations, hospitals, old
age homes, research foundations etc. The scope of services rendered by NGOs is
extremely wide and as such cannot be covered in a small definition. Some examples
of NGOs operating in India include Child Relief and You (CRY), NORAD, UNICEF,
Godhuli, Vidya, Concern India Foundation., etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.28  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(3) Non-Governmental Organisations are generally incorporated as societies
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or as a trust under the India Trust Act,
1882, or under any other law corresponding to these Laws enforced in any part of
India. NGOs can also be incorporated as a company under section 8 of the
Companies Act, 2013. None of the above mentioned Act warrant a mandatory
registration under them for an NGO. But if an NGO is created as a trust and trust
relates to immovable property worth more than one hundred rupees, the provision
of Section 17(1) of the Registration Act, 1908 read with Section 123 of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882 must be complied with and the registration of trust becomes
mandatory. In some states, such as the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat, where
Public Trusts Acts have been passed, such as the Bombay Public Trusts Act 1950,
all charitable trusts have to be registered under these specific Public Trusts Acts.
Registration under the Income Tax Act, 1961 and the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 2010 would also be invoked in many cases.

NGOs registered under the Companies Act, 2013 must maintain their books of
account under the accrual basis as required by the provisions of section 128 of the
said Act. If the accounts are not maintained on accrual basis, it would amount to
non-compliance of the provision of the Companies Act, 2013. The NGOs which are
not registered under the Companies Act, 2013 are allowed to maintain accounts
either an accrual basis or cash basis.

3.2 Sources and Applications of Funds

(1) The main sources of funds include grants and donations, fund raising
programmes, advertisements, fees from the members, technical assistance fees /
fee for services rendered, subscriptions, gifts, sale of produce or publications, etc.

(a) Donations and grants received in the nature of promoter's contribution are
       in the nature of capital receipts and shown as liabilities in the Balance Sheet
       of NGO. These may either be in the form of corpus contribution or a
       contribution towards revolving fund. A contribution made towards the
       capital or the corpus of an NGO is known as corpus contribution. The
       donors are generally required to specify whether the donation/grant given
       by him shall form part of the corpus of the NGO. Such contributions are
       generally given with reference to the total funds required by an NGO.

(b) Section 11(1)(d) of the Income Tax Act 1961 also states that income in the
       form of voluntary contributions made with a specific direction that they

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.29
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

       shall form part of the corpus of the trust or institution shall not be included
       in the computation of total income.

(c) The objective of a contribution or grant towards a Revolving Fund is to
       rotate the amount by giving temporary loans from the fund to other NGO or
       beneficiaries for their projects and then recover the loan so as to give
       temporary loans again and so on. However, any interest earned from the
       beneficiary on such temporary loans from the revolving fund could be either
       added back to the fund or credited to the Income and Expenditure Account
       depending on restrictions laid down by the authority providing the
       contribution (for the revolving fund) or by the rules and regulations laid down
       by the concerned NGO in this regard.

(d) Donations and grants received for acquisition of specific fixed assets are those
       grants whose primary condition is that an NGO accepting them should purchase,
       construct or otherwise acquire the assets for which the grant is given.

(e) Many a times NGOs receive contributions in kind. These contributions
       include assets such as land, buildings, vehicles, office equipment, etc. and
       articles related to programmes / projects such as food, books, building
       materials, clothes, beds, and raw material for training purposes, e.g., Wool,
       reeds, cloth, etc.

(2) The areas of application of funds for an NGO include Establishment Costs,
Office and Administrative Expenses, Maintenance Expenses, Programme / Project
Expenses, Charity, Donations and Contributions given, etc.

3.3 Provisions Relating to Audit

The auditors of an NGO registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (or
under any law corresponding to this Act, in force in any part of India) or the Indian
Trusts Act 1882 are normally appointed by the Management of the Society or Trust.
The auditors of NGO registered under section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013
are appointed by the members of the company. Some of the statues such as the
Companies Act, 2013, Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act 2010, Income Tax Act
1961 required that the accounts of the NGO be audited and submitted to the
prescribed authorities and failure to do so could lead to forfeiture of certain
exemptions and benefits. In the case of NGO/PDA's different statutes have specified

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.30  AUDITING AND ETHICS

certain audit reports. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act 2010 has
prescribed the format and requires that the same be furnished to the Ministry of
Home Affairs within 60 days from the close of the financial year i.e. by May 30 each
year.

While planning the audit, the auditor may concentrate on the following:

(i) Knowledge of the NGO's work, its mission and vision, areas of operations and
       environment in which it operate.

(ii) Updating knowledge of relevant statutes especially with regard to recent
       amendments, circulars, judicial decisions viz. Foreign Contribution
       (Regulation) Act 2010, Societies Registration Act, 1860, Income Tax Act 1961
       etc. and the Rules related to the statutes.

(iii) Reviewing the legal form of the Organisation and its Memorandum of
       Association, Articles of Association, Rules and Regulations.

(iv) Reviewing the NGO's Organisation chart, then Financial and Administrative
       Manuals, Project and Programme Guidelines, Funding Agencies
       Requirements and formats, budgetary policies if any.

(v) Examination of minutes of the Board/Managing Committee/Governing Body/
       Management and Committees thereof to ascertain the impact of any
       decisions on the financial records.

(vi) Study the accounting system, procedures, internal controls and internal
       checks existing for the NGO and verify their applicability.

(vii) Setting of materiality levels for audit purposes.

(viii) The nature and timing of reports or other communications.

(ix) The involvement of experts and their reports.

(x) Review the previous year's Audit Report.

The audit programme should include in a sequential order all assets, liabilities,
income and expenditure ensuring that no material item is omitted.

(i) Corpus Fund: The contributions / grants received towards corpus be vouched
       with special reference to the letters from the donor(s). The interest income be
       checked with Investment Register and Physical Investments in hand.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.31
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(ii) Reserves: Vouch transfers from projects / programmes with donors letters
       and board resolutions of NGO. Also check transfer of gross value of asset sold
       from capital reserve to general reserve and adjustments during the year.

(iii) Ear-marked Funds: (Earmarking refers to a fund allocation practice in which
       an entity, a government, or an individual sets aside a determined amount of
       funds to use for a specific goal). Check requirements of donors institutions,
       board resolution of NGO, rules and regulations of the schemes of the ear-
       marked funds.

(iv) Project / Agency Balances: Vouch disbursements and expenditure as per
       agreements with donors for each of the balances.

(v) Loans: Vouch loans with loan agreements, counterfoil of receipt issued.

(vi) Fixed Assets: Vouch all acquisitions / sale or disposal of assets including
       depreciation and the authorisations for the same. Also check donor's letters/
       agreements for the grant. In the case of immovable property check title, etc.

(vii) Investments: Check Investment Register and the investments physically
       ensuring that investments are in the name of the NGO. Verify further
       investments and dis- investments for approval by the appropriate authority
       and reference in the bank accounts for the principal amount and interest.

(viii) Cash in Hand: Physically verify the cash in hand and imprest balances, at the
       close of the year and whether it tallies with the books of account.

(ix) Bank Balance: Check the bank reconciliation statements and ascertain details
       for old outstanding and unadjusted amounts.

(x) Inventory: Verify inventory in hand and obtain certificate from the
       management for the quantities and valuation of the same.

(xi) Programme and Project Expenses: Verify agreement with
       donor/contributor(s) supporting the particular programme or project to
       ascertain the conditions with respect to undertaking the programme/project
       and accordingly, in the case of programmes/projects involving contracts,
       ensure that income tax is deducted, deposited and returns filed and verify the
       terms of the contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.32  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(xii) Establishment Expenses: Verify that provident fund, life insurance premium,
       employees state insurance and their administrative charges are deducted,
       contributed and deposited within the prescribed time. Also check other office
       and administrative expenses such as postage, stationery, travelling, etc.

The receipt of income of NGO may be checked on the following lines:

(i) Contributions and Grants for projects and programmes: Check
       agreements with donors and grants letters to ensure that funds received have
       been accounted for. Check that all foreign contribution receipts are deposited
       in the foreign contribution bank account as notified under the Foreign
       Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010

(ii) Receipts from fund raising programmes: Verify in detail the internal control
       system and ascertain who are the persons responsible for collection of funds
       and mode of receipt. Ensure that collections are counted and deposited in
       the bank daily.

(iii) Membership Fees: Check fees received with Membership Register. Ensure proper
       classification is made between entrance and annual fees and life membership fees.
       Reconcile fees received with fees to be received during the year.

(iv) Subscriptions: Check with subscription register and receipts issued. Reconcile
       subscription received with printing and dispatch of corresponding magazine /
       circulars / periodicals. Check the receipts with subscription rate schedule.

(v) Interest and Dividends: Check the interest and dividends received and
       receivable with investments held during the year.

    4. AUDIT OF SOLE TRADER

A sole trader is under no legal obligation to have his accounts audited. However,
many such individuals get their financial statement audited due to regulatory
requirements, such as inventory brokers or on a specific instructions of the bank for
approval of loans, etc.

                                    source :- otranation.com
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.33
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

Appointment of Auditor: Auditors of sole- proprietary concern shall be appointed
by the sole proprietor himself. In case of change of auditor, it would be duty of
incoming auditor to communicate with the previous auditor. As such, sole
proprietor can determine the scope of the audit as well as the conditions under
which it will be carried out.

Example

He can stipulate that only a partial audit shall be carried out, that certain parts of
the accounts shall not be checked or that the auditor also shall prepare the final
statements of account. He can also decide whether the audit shall be carried out
continuously or at the end of the year.

On these considerations, it is desirable that the contract of appointment of auditor
in such a case should be in writing; also that it should clearly define the scope of the
work which the auditor is expected to carry out. This helps to prevent
misunderstanding. If the appointment of the auditor is not in writing, the auditor
should write to his client explaining the scope of his duties. While doing so, he
should state the limitations, if any, placed upon his work to obtain the client's
confirmation.

The advantages and audit procedure discussed in following paragraphs of audit in
case of partnership firm would be similar in case of proprietorship.

    5. AUDIT OF FIRM

Appointment of Auditors: The auditor to a firm is usually appointed by the
partners either on the basis of a decision taken by them or to comply with a
condition in the partnership agreement. His remuneration is also fixed by the
partners. It is important that the letter of appointment should clearly state the
nature and scope of audit which is to be carried out and particulars of limitations,
if any, under which he would have to function. In case of change of auditor, it would
be duty of incoming auditor to communicate with the previous auditor.

The auditor may, particularly, ensure application of accounting standards
prescribed by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. In case the firm is
required to get its accounts audited under the requirements of any statute, the
auditor will have to qualify the report in case of non-compliance with the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.34  AUDITING AND ETHICS

accounting standards. Alternatively, only disclosure of non- compliance with the
accounting standards, would be sufficient without making it a subject matter of
qualification.

Matters to be considered before starting audit: Also, before starting the audit,
he should examine the partnership agreement and note the provisions therein as
regards the following matters:

1. The name and style under which the business shall be conducted.

2. The duration of the partnership, if any, that has been agreed upon.

3. The amount of capital that shall be contributed by each partner--whether it
       will be fixed or could be varied from year to year.

4. The period at the end of which the accounts of the partnership will be closed
       periodically and the proportions in which the profit shall be divided among
       the partners or losses shall have to be contributed by them; whether the
       losses shall be borne by the partners or whether any of the partners will not
       be required to do so.

5. The provisions as regards maintenance of books of account and the matters
       which must be taken into account for determining the profits of the firm
       available for division among the partners e.g., creation of reserves, provision
       for depreciation, etc. also the period within which accounts can be reopened
       for correcting a manifest error.

6. Borrowing capacity of the partnership (when it is not implied as in the case
       of non-trading firms).

7. The rate at which interest will be allowed on the capitals and loans provided
       by partners and the rate at which it will be charged on their drawings and
       current accounts.

8. Whether any salaries are payable to the partners or withdrawals are permitted
       against shares of profits and, if so, to what extent?

9. Duties of the partners as regards the management of business of the firm;
       also, the partners who shall act as managing partners.

10. Who shall operate the bank account of the firm? How will the surplus funds of
       the partnership be invested?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.35
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

11. Limitations and restrictions that have been agreed upon, the rights and
       powers of partners and on their implied authority to pledge the firm's credit
       or to render it liable.

Advantages of Audit of a Partnership Firm - On broad considerations, the
advantages of audit of accounts of a partnership could be stated as follows:

(1) Disputes:- Audited accounts provide a convenient and reliable means of
       settling accounts between the partners and, thereby, the possibility of
       occurrence of a dispute among them is mitigated. On this consideration, it is
       usually provided in and accepted by the partners, shall be binding upon them,
       unless some manifest error is brought to light within a specified period
       subsequent to the accounts having been signed.

(2) Dissolution:- On the retirement or death of a partner, audited accounts,
       which have been accepted by the partners, constitute a reliable evidence for
       computing the amounts due to the retiring partner or to the representative
       of the deceased partner in respect of his share of capital, profits and goodwill.

(3) Reliable:- Audited statement of accounts are relied upon by the banks when
       advancing loans, as well as by prospective purchasers of the business, as
       evidence of the profitability of the concern and its financial position.

(4) Admission:- Audited statements of account can be helpful in the
       negotiations to admit a person as a partner, especially when they are available
       for a number of past years.

(5) Control:- An audit is an effective safeguard against any undue advantage
       being taken by a working partner or partners especially in the case of those
       partners who are not actively associated with the working of the firm.

Matters which should be specially considered in the audit of accounts of a
partnership:

(i) Letter of Appointment:- Confirming that the letter of appointment, signed
       by a partner, duly authorised, clearly states the nature and scope of audit
       contemplated by the partners, specially the limitation, if any, under which the
       auditor shall have to function.

(ii) Partnership Documents:- Studying the minute book, if any, maintained to
       record the policy decision taken by partners specially the minutes relating to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.36  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       authorisation of extraordinary and capital expenditure, raising of loans;
       purchase of assets, extraordinary contracts entered into and other such
       matters as are not of a routine nature.

(iii) Objects of Partnership:- Verifying that the business in which the partnership
       is engaged is authorised by the partnership agreement; or by any extension
       or modification thereof agreed to subsequently.

(iv) Books of Account:- Examining whether books of account appear to be
       reasonable and are considered adequate in relation to the nature of the
       business of the partnership.

(v) Mutual Interest:- Verifying generally that the interest of no partner has
       suffered prejudicially by an activity engaged in by the partnership which, it
       was not authorised to do under the partnership deed or by any violation of a
       provision in the partnership agreements.

(vi) Provision for Taxes:- Confirming that a provision for the firm's tax payable by
       the partnership has been made in the accounts before arriving at the amount
       of profit divisible among the partners.

(vii) Division of Profits:- Verifying that the profits and losses have been divided
       among the partners in their agreed profit-sharing ratio.

From the foregoing steps involved in the audit of a partnership it would be observed
that like the audit of every other commercial undertaking, it culminates in the
verification of the Balance Sheet and the Statement of Profit and Loss to ensure
that these exhibit a true and fair state of affairs of the firm.

The object of examining the partnership agreement, which is an important feature
of such an audit, is that the auditor may be able to report to the partners if the
interest of any partner has been prejudicially affected, on account of the firm having
engaged itself in an activity which it was not authorised to do or violation of any
provision of the partnership agreement.

Test Your Understanding 2

CA Akash Virmani is auditor of a partnership firm consisting of 4 partners. During
the year, one of the partners has retired and another partner has joined the next
day. Discuss, any one point, which shall be considered by you to ensure that
financial statements of firm are not misstated due to change of constitution of firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.37
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

5.1 Basics of Limited Liability Partnerships (LLP) Audit

LLP is governed by Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008. It is a form of business
organisation which enshrines in itself the advantages of both the Company and
Partnership forms of Organisation. Minimum of 2 Partners can form an LLP and
atleast two partners would be Designated Partners who would be required to take
DPIN (Designated Partner Identification Number) The Partners in an LLP and their
rights and duties are governed by way of an agreement between them.

It defines a Small Limited Liability Partnership to denote any LLP:

a) the Contribution of which, does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees
       (INR 25,00,000) or such higher amount, not exceeding five crore rupees, as
       may be prescribed; and

b) the Turnover of which, as per the Statement of Accounts and Solvency for
       the immediately preceding financial year, does not exceed forty lakh rupees
       (INR 40,00,000) or such higher amount, not exceeding fifty crore rupees,
       as may be prescribed;

Whether LLP is required to maintain Books of Accounts:- An LLP shall be under
obligation to maintain annual accounts reflecting true and fair view of its state of
affairs. LLP's are required to maintain books of accounts which shall contain-

1. Particulars of all sums of money received and expended by the LLP and the
       matters in respect of which the receipt and expenditure takes place,

2. A record of the assets and liabilities of the LLP,

3. Statements of costs of goods purchased, inventories, work-in-progress,
       finished goods and costs of goods sold,

4. Any other particulars which the partners may decide.

Audit of the Accounts of an LLP:- The accounts of every LLP shall be audited in
accordance with Rule 24 of LLP, Rules 2009. Such rules, inter-alia, provides that any
LLP, whose turnover does not exceed, in any financial year, forty lakh rupees, or
whose contribution does not exceed twenty five lakh rupees, is not required to get
its accounts audited. However, if the partners of such limited liability partnership
decide to get the accounts of such LLP audited, the accounts shall be audited only
in accordance with such rule.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.38  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Advantages / Purpose / Need of Audit

1. Detection of Errors:- Auditing the accounts of a LLP helps in detecting errors
       & frauds & verification of financial statements.

2. Disputes:-Disputes, if any between any partners in the matter of accounts
       can be settled with the help of audited accounts.

3. Reliability:- Banks & financial institutions lend money to the firms only on the
       basis of audited accounts.

4. Better Compliance and Management:-Periodical visits & suggestions by the
       auditor will be helpful in improving the management of the LLP.

5. Reconstitution:- For settling accounts between partners at the time of
       admission, death, retirement, insolvency, insanity, etc. audited accounts are
       accepted by those concerned who have dealings with the LLP.

Returns to be maintained and filed by an LLP :-

 Every LLP would be required to file annual return in Form 11 with ROC within
       60 days of closer of financial year. The annual return will be available for
       public inspection on payment of prescribed fees to Registrar.

 Every LLP is also required to submit Statement of Account and Solvency in
       Form 8 which shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the end of six
       months the financial year to which the Statement of Account and Solvency
       relates.

Appointment of Auditor: The auditor may be appointed by the designated
partners of the LLP ­

1. At any time for the first financial year but before the end of first financial year,

2. At least thirty days prior to the end of each financial year (other than the first
       financial year),

3. To fill the casual vacancy in the office of auditor,

4. To fill the casual vacancy caused by removal of auditor.

The partners may appoint the auditors if the designated partners have failed to
appoint them.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.39
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

Auditor's Duty Regarding Audit of LLP
1. Engagement Letter :- The auditor should get definite instructions in writing

       as to the work to be performed by him.
2. Minutes Book :- If partners maintain minute book he shall refer it for any

       resolution passed regarding the accounts
3. LLP Agreement:- The auditor should read the LLP agreement & note the

       following provisions
       (a) Nature of the business of the LLP.
       (b) Amount of capital contributed by each partner.
       (c) Interest ­ in respect of additional capital contributed.
       (d) Duration of partnership.
       (e) Drawings allowed to the partners.
       (f) Salaries, commission etc. payable to partners.
       (g) Borrowing powers of the LLP.
       (h) Rights & duties of partners.
       (i) Method of settlement of accounts between partners at the time of

               admission, retirement, admission etc.
       (j) Any loans advanced by the partners.
       (k) Profit sharing ratio
4. Reporting :- The auditor should mention
       (a) Whether the records of the firm appear to be correct & reliable.
       (b) Whether he was able to obtain all information & explanation necessary

               for his work.
       (c) Whether any restriction was imposed upon him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.40  AUDITING AND ETHICS

6. AUDIT OF CHARITABLE INSTITUTION

                                                source :-charities.gov.sg

In the case of audit of a charitable institution, attention should be paid to the
following matters-
(1) General

       (i) Studying the constitution under which the charitable institution has
               been set up.

       (ii) Verifying whether the institution is being managed in the manner
               contemplated by the law under which it has been set up.

       (iii) Examining the system of internal check, especially as regards
               accounting of amounts collected.

       (iv) Verifying in detail the income and confirming that the amounts received
               have been deposited in the bank regularly and promptly.

       (v) Examine the Trust Deed or the Regulations as laid down.
(2) Subscriptions and donations

       (i) Ascertaining, if any, the changes made in amount of annual or life
               membership subscription during the year.

       (ii) Whether official receipts are issued;
               (a) confirming that adequate control is imposed over unused receipt
                       books;
               (b) obtaining all receipt books covering the period under review;
               (c) test checking the counterfoils with the cash book; any cancelled
                       receipts being specially looked into;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.41
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

               (d) obtaining the printed list of subscriptions and donations and
                       agreeing them with the total collections shown in the accounts;

               (e) examining the system of internal check regarding moneys
                       received from box collections, flag days, etc. and checking the
                       amount received from representatives, with the correspondence
                       and the official receipts issued; paying special attention to the
                       system of control exercised over collections and the steps taken
                       to ensure that all collections made have been accounted for; and

               (f) verifying the total subscriptions and donations received with any
                       figures published in reports, etc. issued by the charity.

(3) Legacies ­ Verifying the amounts received by reference to correspondence
       with any figures and other available information.

(4) Grants

       (i) Vouching the amount received with the relevant correspondence,
               receipts and minute books.

       (ii) Obtaining a certificate from a responsible official showing the amount
               of grants received.

(5) Investments Income

       (i) Vouching the amounts received with the dividend and interest
               counterfoils.

       (ii) Checking the calculations of interest received on securities bearing
               fixed rates of interest.

       (iii) Checking that the appropriate dividend has been received where any
               investment has been sold ex-dividend or purchased cum-dividend.

       (iv) Comparing the amounts of dividend received with schedule of
               investments making special enquiries into any investments held for
               which no dividend has been received.

(6) Rent

       (i) Examining the rent roll and inspecting tenancy agreements, noting in
               each case:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.42  AUDITING AND ETHICS

               (a) the amounts of the rent, and

               (b) the due dates.

       (ii) Vouching the rent on to the rent roll from the counterfoils of receipt
               books and checking the totals of the cash book.

(7) Special function, etc. - Vouching gross receipts and outgoings in respect of
       any special functions, e.g. concerts, dramatic performance, etc., held in aid of
       the charity with such vouchers and cash statements as are necessary. In
       particular, verifying that the proceeds of all tickets issued have been
       accounted for, after making the allowance for returns.

(8) Income Tax Refunds - Where income-tax has been deducted at source from
       the Investment income, it should be seen that a refund thereof has been
       obtained since charitable institutions are exempt from payment of Income-
       tax. This involves:

       (i) vouching the Income-tax refund with the correspondence with the
               Income- tax Department; and

       (ii) checking the calculation of the repayment of claims.

(9) Expenditure

       (i) Vouching payment of grants, also verifying that the grants have been
               paid only for a charitable purpose or purposes falling within the purview
               of the objects for which the charitable institution has been set up and
               that no trustee, director or member of the Managing Committee has
               benefited there from either directly or indirectly.

       (ii) Verifying the schedules of securities held, as well as inventories of
               properties both movable and immovable by inspecting the securities
               and title deeds of property and by physical verification of the movable
               properties on a test- basis.

       (iii) Verifying the cash and bank payments.

       (iv) Ascertaining that any funds contributed for a special purpose have been
               utilised for the purpose.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.43
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

    7. AUDIT OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
          (SCHOOL, COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY)

The special steps involved in their audit are the following-
(A) General :-

       1. Examine the Trust Deed or Regulations, in the case of school or college
               and note all the provisions affecting accounts. In the case of a university,
               refer to the Act of Legislature and the Regulation framed thereunder.

       2. Read through the minutes of the meetings of the Managing Committee

               or Governing Body, noting resolutions affecting accounts to see that
               these have been duly complied with, specially the decisions as regards
               the operation of bank accounts and sanctioning of expenditure.

(B) Fee from Students :-

       1. Check names entered in the Students Fee Register for each month or
               term, with the respective Class Registers, showing names of students on
               rolls and test amount of fees charged; and verify that there operates a
               system of internal check which ensures that demands against the
               students are properly raised.

       2. Check fees received by comparing counterfoils of receipts granted with
               entries in the Cash Book and tracing the collections in the Fee Register
               to confirm that the revenue from this source has been duly accounted
               for.

       3. Total up the various columns of the Fees Register for each month or
               term to ascertain that fees paid in advance have been carried forward

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.44  AUDITING AND ETHICS

               and that the arrears that are irrecoverable have been written off under
               the sanction of an appropriate authority.

       4. Check admission fees with admission slips signed by the head of the
               institution and confirm that the amount has been credited to a Capital
               fund, unless the Managing Committee has taken a decision to the
               contrary.

       5. See that free studentship and concessions have been granted by a
               person authorised to do so, having regard to the Rules prepared by the
               Managing Committee.

       6. Confirm that fines for late payment or absence, etc. have been either
               collected or remitted under proper authority.

       7. Confirm that hostel dues were recovered before student's accounts were
               closed and their deposits of caution money refunded.

(C) Other Receipts/Grants & Donations :-

       1. Verify rental income from landed property with the rent rolls, etc.

       2. Vouch income from endowments and legacies, as well as interest and
               dividends from investment; also inspect the securities in respect of
               investments held.

       3. Verify any Government or local authority grant with the memo of grant. If any
               expense has been disallowed for purposes of grant, ascertain the reasons
               thereof.

(D) Expenditure :-

       1. Verify that the Provident Fund money of the staff has been invested in
               appropriate securities.

       2. Vouch donations, if any with the list published with the annual report. If
               some donations were meant for any specific purpose, see that the
               money was utilised for the purpose.

       3. Vouch, all capital expenditure in the usual way and verify the same with
               the sanction for the Committee as contained in the minute book.

       4. Vouch, in the usual manner, all establishment expenses and enquire into
               any unduly heavy expenditure under any head. If there was any annual

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.45
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

               budget prepared, see that any excess under any head over the
               budgeted amount was duly sanctioned by the Managing Committee. If
               not, bring it to the Committee's notice in your report.

       5. See that increase in the salaries of the staff have been sanctioned and
               minuted by the Committee.

(E) Assets & Liabilities :-

       1. Report any old heavy arrears on account of fees, dormitory rents, etc.
               to the Managing Committee.

       2. Confirm that caution money and other deposits paid by students on
               admission, have been shown as liability in the balance sheet not
               transferred to revenue, unless they are not refundable.

       3. See that the investments representing endowment funds for prizes are
               kept separate and any income in excess of the prizes has been
               accumulated and invested along with the corpus.

       4. Ascertain that the system ordering inspection on receipt and issue of
               provisions, foodstuffs, clothing and other equipment is efficient and all
               bills are duly authorised and passed before payment.

       5. Verify the inventories of furniture, stationery, clothing, provision and all
               equipment etc. These should be checked by reference to Inventory
               Register or corresponding inventories of the previous year and values
               applied to various items should be test checked.

(F) Compliances :-

       1. Confirm that the refund of taxes deducted from the income from
               investment (interest on securities etc.) has been claimed and recovered
               since the institutions are generally exempted from the payment of
               income-tax.

       2. Finally, verify the annual statements of account and, while doing so see
               that separate statements of account have been prepared as regards
               Poor Boys Fund, Games Fund, Hostel and Provident Fund of staff, etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.46  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       2. Finally, verify the annual statements of account and, while doing so see
               that separate statements of account have been prepared as regards
               Poor Boys Fund, Games Fund, Hostel and Provident Fund of staff, etc.

Test Your Understanding 3

You are auditor of a school operating in your city. During audit of a year, it is
noticed that fees concessions to students have been provided in substantial
number of cases. Discuss, how, you as an auditor, would proceed to verify the
same?

    8. AUDIT OF HOSPITAL

The special steps involved in such an audit are stated below-

                                                                 Source of image: tobuz.com

1. Register of Patients: Vouch the Register of patients with copies of bills issued
       to them. Verify bills for a selected period with the patients' attendance record
       to see that the bills have been correctly prepared. Also see that bills have been
       issued to all patients from whom an amount was recoverable according to the
       rules of the hospital.

2. Collection of Cash: Check cash collections as entered in the Cash Book with
       the receipts, counterfoils and other evidence for example, copies of patients
       bills, counterfoils of dividend and other interest warrants, copies of rent bills,
       etc.

3. Income from Investments, Rent etc: See with reference to the property and
       Investment Register that all income that should have been received by way

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.47
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

       of rent on properties, dividends, and interest on securities have been
       collected.

4. Legacies and Donations: Ascertain that legacies and donations received for
       a specific purpose have been applied in the manner agreed upon.

5. Reconciliation of Subscriptions: Trace all collections of subscription and
       donations from the Cash Book to the respective Registers. Reconcile the total
       subscriptions due (as shown by the Subscription Register and the amount
       collected and that still outstanding).

6. Authorisation and Sanctions: Vouch all purchases and expenses and verify
       that the capital expenditure was incurred only with the prior sanction of the
       Trustees or the Managing Committee and that appointments and increments
       to staff have been duly authorised.

7. Grants and TDS: Verify that grants, if any, received from Government or local
       authority has been duly accounted for. Also, that refund in respect of taxes
       deducted at source has been claimed.

8. Budgets: Compare the totals of various items of expenditure and income with
       the amount budgeted for them and report to the Trustees or the Managing
       Committee, significant variations which have taken place.

9. Internal Check: Examine the internal check as regards the receipt and issue
       of stores; medicines, linen, apparatus, clothing, instruments, etc. so as to
       ensure that purchases have been properly recorded in the Inventory Register
       and that issues have been made only against proper authorisation.

10. Depreciation: See that depreciation has been written off against all the assets
       at the appropriate rates.

11. Registers: Inspect the bonds, share scrips, title deeds of properties and
       compare their particulars with those entered in the property and Investment
       Registers.

12. Inventories: Obtain inventories, especially of stocks and stores as at the end
       of the year and check a percentage of the items physically; also compare their
       total values with respective ledger balances.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.48  AUDITING AND ETHICS

13. Management Representation and Certificate: Get proper Management
       Representation and Certificate with respect to various aspects covered during
       the course of audit.

    9. AUDIT OF CLUB

The special steps involved in such an audit are stated below-

(1) Entrance Fee :- Vouch the receipt on account of entrance fees with members'
       applications, counterfoils issued to them, as well as on a reference to minutes
       of the Managing Committee.

(2) Subscriptions :- Vouch members' subscriptions with the counterfoils of
       receipt issued to them, trace receipts for a selected period to the Register of
       Members; also reconcile the amount of total subscriptions due with the
       amount collected and that outstanding.

(3) Arrears of Subscriptions :- Ensure that arrears of subscriptions for the
       previous year have been correctly brought over and arrears for the year under
       audit and subscriptions received in advance have been correctly adjusted.

(4) Arithmetical accuracy :- Check totals of various columns of the Register of
       members and tally them across.

(5) Irrecoverable Member Dues :- See the Register of Members to ascertain the
       Member's dues which are in arrear and enquire whether necessary steps have
       been taken for their recovery; the amount considered irrecoverable should be
       mentioned in the Audit Report.

(6) Pricing :- Verify the internal check as regards members being charged with
       the price of foodstuffs and drinks provided to them and their guests, as well
       as, with the fees chargeable for the special services rendered, such as billiards,
       tennis, etc.

(7) Member Accounts :- Trace debits for a selected period from subsidiary
       registers maintained in respect of supplies and services to members to confirm
       that the account of every member has been debited with amounts recoverable
       from him.

(8) Purchases :- Vouch purchase of sports items, furniture, crockery, etc. and trace
       their entries into the respective inventory registers.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT                     9.49
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(9) Margins earned :- Vouch purchases of foodstuffs, cigars, wines, etc., and test
       their sale price so as to confirm that the normal rates of gross profit have
       been earned on their sales. The inventory of unsold provisions and stores, at
       the end of year, should be verified physically and its valuation checked.

(10) Inventories :- Check the inventory of furniture, sports material and other
       assets physically with the respective inventory registers or inventories
       prepared at the end of the year.

(11) Investments :- Inspect the share scrips and bonds in respect of investments,
       check their current values for disclosure in final accounts; also ascertain that
       the arrangements for their safe custody are satisfactory.

(12) Management Powers :- Examine the financial powers of the secretary and,
       if these have been exceeded, report specific case for confirmation by the
       Managing Committee.

    10. AUDIT OF CINEMA

The special steps involved in its audit are stated below-

                                                            source :- indiatvnews.com

(1) Verify the internal control mechanism-
       (a) that entrance to the cinema-hall during show is only through printed
               tickets;
       (b) that they are serially numbered and bound into books;
       (c) that the number of tickets issued for each show and class, are different
               though the numbers of the same class for the show on the same day,
               each week, run serially;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.50  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (d) that for advance booking a separate series of tickets is issued; and

       (e) that the inventory of tickets is kept in the custody of a responsible
               official.

(2) Confirm that at the end of show, a statement of tickets sold is prepared and
       cash collected is agreed with it.

(3) Verify that a record is kept of the `free passes' and that these are issued
       under proper authority.

(4) Reconcile the amount of Tax collected with the total number of tickets issued
       for each class and vouch and verify the tax returns filed each month.

(5) Vouch the entries in the Cash Book in respect of cash collected on sale of
       tickets for different shows on a reference to Daily Statements which have
       been test checked as aforementioned with record of tickets issued for the
       different shows held.

(6) Verify the charges collected for advertisement slides and shorts by reference
       to the Register of Slides and Shorts Exhibited kept at the cinema as well with
       the agreements, entered into with advertisers in this regard.

(7) Vouch the expenditure incurred on advertisement, repairs and maintenance.
       No part of such expenditure should be capitalized.

(8) Confirm that depreciation on machinery and furniture has been charged at
       an appropriate rate.

(9) Vouch payments on account of film hire with bills of distributors and in the
       process, the agreements concerned should be referred to.

(10) Examine unadjusted balance out of advance paid to the distributors against
       film hire contracts to see that they are good and recoverable. If any film in
       respect of which an advance was paid has already run, it should be enquired
       as to why the advance has not been adjusted. The management should be
       asked to make a provision in respect of advances that are considered
       irrecoverable.

(11) The arrangement for collection of the share in the restaurant income should
       be enquired into either a fixed sum or a fixed percentage of the taking may
       be receivable annually. In case the restaurant is run by the Cinema, its

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.51
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

accounts should be checked. The audit should cover sale of various items of
foodstuffs, purchase of foodstuffs, cold drink, etc. as in the case of club.

11. AUDIT OF HIRE PURCHASE AND LEASING
      COMPANIES

                                                source :- efinancemanagement.com

(A) HIRE - PURCHASE :-

(1) A Hire-purchase agreement means an agreement under which goods are let on
hire and under which the hirer has an option to purchase them in accordance with
the terms of the agreement and includes an agreement under which-

(i) possession of goods is delivered by the owner thereof to a person on
       condition that such person pays the agreed amount in periodical instalments,

(ii) the property in the goods is to pass to such person on the payment of the last
       of such instalments, and

(iii) such person has a right to terminate the agreement at any time before the
       property so passes.

(2) Hirer means the person who obtains or has obtained possession of goods
from an owner under a hire- purchase agreement and owner means the person who
lets or has let, delivers or has delivered possession of goods to a hirer under a hire-
purchase agreement in order to complete the purchase of, or the acquisition of
property in the goods of which the agreement relates; and includes any sum so
payable by the hirer under the hire- purchase agreement by way of a deposit or
other initial payment.

(3) While checking the hire- purchase transaction, the auditor may examine the
following:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.52  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(i) Hire purchase agreement is in writing and is signed by all parties.

(ii) Hire purchase agreement specifies clearly-

       (a) The hire-purchase price of the goods to which the agreement relates;

       (b) The cash price of the goods, that is to say, the price at which the goods
               may be purchased by the hirer for cash;

       (c) The date on which the agreement shall be deemed to have commenced;

       (d) The number of instalments by which the hire- purchase price is to be
               paid, the amount of each of those instalments, and the date, or the
               mode of determining the date, upon which it is payable, and the person
               to whom and the place where it is payable; and

       (e) The goods to which the agreement relates, in a manner sufficient to
               identify them.

(iii) Ensure that instalment payments are being received regularly as per the
       agreement.

(B) LEASES :-

(1) In a lease agreement, a party (called `lessee') acquires the right to use an
asset for an agreed period of time in consideration of payment of rent to another
party (called `lessor').

(2) In certain lease agreements, the legal ownership of the asset remains with the
lessor (the leasing company), but in substance, all the risks and rewards of ownership
of the asset are transferred to the lessee. In other words, the lease is, in effect, a
financing arrangement. Such leases are termed as finance leases. An operating
lease, on the other hand, is a simple arrangement where, in return for rent, the
lessor allows the lessee to use the asset for a certain period.

(3) A normal finance lease transaction usually goes through the following
modality:

I. The lessee will select the equipment, and satisfy himself about its functional
       fitness and specifications, the lessor has no participation at this stage.

II. Having chosen the equipment, the lessee approaches a lessor, either directly or
       through a lease-broking agency.

III. The lease agreement is broadly negotiated and the rates are finalised. The

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.53
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

       lessor places an order on the manufacturer as chosen by the lessee.

IV. The manufacturer delivers the equipment at the site of the lessee, and the
       latter gives notice of acceptance to the lessor.

V. The lease agreement giving detailed terms of contract is signed between the
       parties. Leases will normally be full pay-out, with term varying as per
       requirements.

VI. During the lease period, the lessee:

       · Will pay rentals regularly at periods agreed-upon, which are usually each
               calendar month;

       · Will keep the equipment in good repair and working condition, etc.

       · Will be entitled to any manufacturer's warranties or after-sales services.

VII. At the end of the lease period, the equipment shall retreat to the lessor. The
       lessee may, however, be given a renewal right, or may be allowed to participate
       in purchase of the equipment when the lessor intends to sell it. No purchase
       option shall be given to the lessee in the lease agreement itself.

(4) Auditor's Procedures:- In respect of leasing transaction entered into by the
leasing company, the following procedures may be adopted by the auditor:

(1) The object clause of leasing company to see that the goods like capital goods,
       consumer durables etc. in respect of which the company can undertake such
       activities. Further, to ensure that whether company can undertake financing
       activities or not.

(2) Whether there exists a procedure to ascertain the credit analysis of lessee like
       lessee's ability to meet the commitment under lease, past credit record,
       capital strength, availability of collateral security, etc.

(3) The lease agreement should be examined and the following points may be
       noted:

       (i) the description of the lessor, the lessee, the equipment and the location
               where the equipment is to be installed. (The stipulation that the
               equipment shall not be removed from the described location except for
               repairs. For the sake of identification, the lessor may also require plates
               or markings to be attached to the equipment).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.54  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (ii) the amount of tenure of lease, dates of payment, late charges, deposits
               or advances etc. should be noted.

       (iii) whether the equipment shall be returned to the lessor on termination of
               the agreement and the cost shall be borne by the lessee.

       (iv) whether the agreement prohibits the lessee from assigning the
               subletting the equipment and authorises the lessor to do so.

(4) Examine the lease proposal form submitted by the lessee requesting the lessor
       to provide him the equipment on lease.

(5) Ensure that the invoice is retained safely as the lease is a long-term contract.

(6) Examine the acceptance letter obtained from the lessee indicating that the
       equipment has been received in order and is acceptable to the lessee.

(7) See the Board resolution authorising a particular director to execute the lease
       agreement has been passed by the lessee.

(8) See that the copies of the insurance policies have been obtained by the lessor
       for his records.

Students need to pay attention that AS-19 define that lease arrangements
could be of 2 types i.e. 1 Finance Lease and 2 Operating Lease.

Finance Lease: An arrangement with the following attributes qualifies as a Finance Lease:

The lease arrangement transfers ownership of the asset to the lessee at the end of
the lease term;

 The lessee has the option to purchase the asset at a price that is expected to
       be sufficiently lower than the fair value at the date the option becomes
       exercisable for it to be reasonably certain, at the inception of the lease, that
       the option will be exercised;

 The lease term is for the major part of the economic life of the asset even if
       title is not transferred;

 At the inception of the lease, the present value of the minimum lease
       payments amounts to at least substantially all of the fair value of the leased
       asset; and

 the leased assets are of such a specialized nature that only the lessee can use
       them without major modifications

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT                                 9.55
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

Operating Lease

An arrangement that does not transfer substantially all the risks and rewards
incidental to ownership qualifies as an Operating Lease. In other words, an
operating lease is a lease arrangement "Other than finance lease".

The below table captures the broad differences under both the above said types of
lease arrangements:

                      Operating Lease                       Finance Lease

Common examples       Lease of Projector, Lease of Plant and

                      Computers, Laptops, Coffee Machinery, Land, Office

                      Dispensers etc.                       Building etc.

Ownership             Ownership of the asset                Ownership transfer option
                      remains with the lessor for           at the end of the lease
                      the entire period of lease.           period is with the lessee.
                                                            Title may or may not be
                                                            eventually transferred.

Accounting treatment  Operating lease is generally          Finance lease is treated like
                      treated like a renting                loan arrangement. Hence,
                      arrangement. That means,              the asset ownership is
                      the lease payments are                considered of that of the
                      treated as operating                  lessee and thus appears on
                      expenses and the asset                the balance sheet of the
                      does not appear as an asset           lessee.
                      on lessee's balance sheet.

Purchase Option       Under operating lease, the            Finance lease allows the
                      lessee does not have any              lessee to have a purchase
                      option to buy the asset               option at less than the fair
                      during the lease period.              market value of the asset.

Lease Term            Lease term generally                  Lease term is generally more
                      extends to less than 75% of
                      the projected useful life of          than or equal to estimated
                      the leased asset.
                                                            economic life of the asset

                                                            under          the  lease

                                                            arrangement.

Operating/  running Lessee pays only the Lessee generally bears
expenses
                      monthly lease payments. insurance, maintenance and

                      No                           running  or taxes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                9.56  AUDITING AND ETHICS
Tax benefit
                      administration costs are to
                      be borne for example:
                      registration, repairs etc.
                      since it gives only right to
                      use the asset.

                      Since operating lease is as   Lessee can claim both
                      good as renting, lease        interest and depreciation
                      payment is considered as      expense as financial lease is
                      expense. No depreciation      treated like a loan.
                      can be claimed by the
                      lessee.

    12. AUDIT OF HOTELS

The special considerations in a hotel audit can be summarised as follows:

(1) Internal Controls - Pilfering is one of the greatest problems in any hotel and
the importance of internal control cannot be undermined. It is the responsibility of
management to introduce controls which will minimise the leakage as far as
possible. Evidence of their success is provided by the preparation of regular
perhaps weekly, trading accounts for each sales point and a detailed scrutiny of the
resulting profit percentages, with any deviation from the anticipated form being
investigated. The auditor should obtain these regular trading accounts for the
period under review, examine them and obtain explanations for any apparent
deviations.

The auditor should verify a few restaurant bills by reference to K.O.T.s (Kitchen Order
Tickets) or basic record. This would enable the auditor to ensure that controls
regarding revenue cycle are in order.

The auditor should satisfy himself that all taxes collected from occupants on food
and occupation have been paid over to the proper authorities. If the internal control
in a hotel is weak or perhaps breaks down, then a very serious problem exists for
the auditor. As a result of the transient nature of many of his clients' records, the
auditor must rely to a very large extent on the gross margin shown by the accounts.
As a result, the scope of his audit tests will necessarily be increased and, in the
event of a material margin discrepancy being unexplained, he will have to consider
qualifying his audit report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.57
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(2) Room Sales & Hall Bookings - The charge for room sales is normally posted
to guest bills by the receptionist/ front office or in the case of large hotels by the
night auditor. The source of these entries is invariably the guest register and audit
tests should be carried out to ensure that the correct numbers of guests are
charged for the correct period. Any difference between the charged rates used on
the guests' bills and the standard room rate should be investigated to ensure that
they have been properly authorised.

In many hotels, the housekeeper prepares a daily report of the rooms which were
occupied the previous night and the number of beds kept in each room. This report
tends not to be permanently retained and the auditor should ensure that a
sufficient number of reports are available for him to test both with the guest
register and with the individual guest's bill. The auditor should ensure that proper
valuation of occupancy-in-progress at the balance sheet date is made and included
in the accounts. The auditor should ensure that proper records are maintained for
booking of halls and other premises for special parties and recovered on the basis
of the tariff.

(3) Inventories - The inventories in any hotel are both readily portable and
saleable particularly the food and beverage inventories. It is therefore extremely
important that all movements and transfers of such inventories should be properly
documented to enable control to be exercised over each individual stores areas
and sales point. The auditor should carry out tests to ensure that all such
documentation is accurately processed.

Areas where large quantities of inventory are held should be kept locked, the key
being retained by the departmental manager. The key should be released only to
trusted personnel and unauthorised persons should not be permitted in the stores
areas except under constant supervision. In particular, any movement of goods in
or out of the stores should be checked. Many hotels use specialised professional
valuers to take and value the inventories on a continuous basis throughout the year.
Such a valuation is then almost invariably used as the basis of the balance sheet
inventory figure at the year end. Although such valuers are independent of the audit
client, it is important that the auditor satisfies himself that the amounts included
for such inventories are reasonable. In order to satisfy himself of this, the auditor
should consider attending the physical inventory taking and carrying out certain
pricing and calculation tests. The extent of such tests could well be limited since the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.58  AUDITING AND ETHICS

figures will have been prepared independently of the hotel.

(4) Fixed Assets - The accounting policies for fixed assets of individual hotels are
likely to differ. However, many hotels account for certain quasi-fixed assets such as
silver and cutlery on inventory basis. This can lead to confusion between each
inventory items and similar assets which are accounted for on a more normal form
on assets basis. In such cases, it is important that very detailed definitions of
inventory items exist and the auditor should carry out tests to ensure that the
definitions have been closely followed. The auditor should see that costs of repairs
and minor renovation and redecoration are treated as revenue expenditure, where
as costs of major alterations and additions to the hotel building and facilities
capitalised.

(5) Casual Labour - The hotel trade operates to very large extent on casual
labour. The records maintained of such wage payments are frequently inadequate.
The auditor should ensure that defalcation on this account does not take place by
suggesting proper controls to the management.

(6) Travel Agents & Shops -

       (i) For ledgers coming through travel agents or other booking agencies
               the bills are usually made on the travel agents or booking agencies. The
               auditor should ensure that money are recovered from the travel agents
               or booking agencies as per the terms of credit allowed.

       (ii) Commission, if any, paid to travel agents or booking agents should be
               checked by reference to the agreement on that behalf.

                                                        source :- agoda.com
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.59
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

13. AUDIT OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES

                                                       source :- quora.com

13.1 Background

A Cooperative (also known as co-operative, co-op, or coop) is "an autonomous
association of persons united voluntarily to meet their common economic,
social, and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly-owned enterprise".
The Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, a Central Act, contains the fundamental
law regarding the formation and working of the co-operative societies in India and
is applicable in many states with or without amendments. In many states, viz.,
Maharashtra, West Bengal, Orissa, the co-operative societies are governed by
specific state Acts. An auditor of a co-operative society should be familiar with the
provisions of the particular Act governing the society under audit.

Co-operative society is a business organisation with a special mode of doing
business, by pulling together all the means of production co-operatively,
elimination of middlemen and exploitation from outside forces.
A chartered accountant has to play a significant role in the development of co-
operative organisations on scientific lines. In this Unit, it is proposed to give a few
guidelines in the matter of audits of co-operative societies.

Apart from audit, some other professional services could be rendered by chartered
accountants such as-

(1) guidance in accounts writing,

(2) installation of accounting system,

(3) internal audit,

(4) management accounting services,

(5) taxation etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.60  AUDITING AND ETHICS

However, the main focus is to give some guidelines about the audit of co-operative
societies in general. The special features of audit applicable to all societies will be
considered first, and subsequently a few special points with reference to audit
programmes of specific types of societies will be considered.

13.2 Audit as per Section 17 of the Co-Operative Societies
      Act, 1912

(1) The Registrar shall audit or cause to be audited by some person authorised
       by him by general or special order in writing in this behalf the accounts of
       every registered society once at least in every year.

(2) The audit under sub-section (1) shall include an examination of overdue
       debts, if any, and a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the society.

(3) The Registrar, the Collector or any person authorised by general or special
       order in writing in this behalf by the Registrar shall at all times have access to
       all the books, accounts, papers and securities of a society, and every officer of
       the society shall furnish such information in regard to the transactions and
       working of the society as the person making such inspection may require.

"Registrar" means a person appointed to perform the duties of a Registrar of
Co- operative Societies under this Act.

The following points should be kept in mind in connection with the audit of a
co-operative society:

1. Qualifications of Auditors - Apart from a chartered accountant within the
meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, some of the State Co-operative
Acts have permitted persons holding a government diploma in co-operative
accounts or in co-operation and accountancy and also a person who has served as
an auditor in the co-operative department of a government to act as an auditor.

2. Appointment of the Auditor - An auditor of a co-operative society is
appointed by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies and the auditor so appointed
conducts the audit on behalf of the Registrar and submits his report to him as also
to the society. The audit fees are paid by the society on the basis of statutory scale
of fees prescribed by the Registrar, according to the category of the society audited.

3. Books, Accounts and other records of Co-operative Societies - Under
section 43(h) of the Central Act, a state government can frame rules prescribing the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.61
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

books and accounts to be kept by a co-operative society.

For example, in Maharashtra, the co-operative societies are required to maintain
books of account in terms of the instructions of the Registrar as following:

(i) All sums of money received and expended by the society and the matters in
       respect of which receipts and expenditure take place.

(ii) All sales and purchases of goods by the society.

(iii) Assets and liabilities of the society.

In order to maintain proper financial accounting records so as to disclose full
financial results of working of the society, the statutory or mandatory provisions
provide a directive, but they are not conclusive. The society is at liberty to maintain
such additional records according to its convenience and which it thinks more
useful for clarity and detailed explanation. Ultimately the financial transactions and
the results thereof must be presented very clearly and in the best possible manner.

Depending upon the nature and object of the society, different kinds of books and
registers will be maintained, so as to disclose a proper and fair picture of financial
transactions. In case of large scale co-operative organisation, different subsidiary
books and registers shall be maintained and the daily summary totals will be
transferred to main Cash Book. For example:

(a) Daily cash sales summary register.

(b) A register of collection from debtors if credit sales are allowed by bye-laws
       of society.

(c) A register of recovery of loans from salaries and directly by receipts from
       members in case of credit society.

(d) Loan disbursement register in case of credit society.

(e) Any other columnar subsidiaries depending upon the nature and functions of
       society.

4. Restrictions on share holdings - According to section 5 of the Central Act,
in the case of a society where the liability of a member of the society is limited, no
member of a society other than a registered society can hold such portion of the
share capital of the society as would exceed a maximum of twenty percent of the
total number of shares or of the value of shareholding to ` 1,000/-. The auditor of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.62  AUDITING AND ETHICS

a co-operative society will be concerned with this provision so as to watch any
breach relating to holding of shares. One should also watch whether any provision
in the bye-laws of the society is not contrary to this statutory position. The State
Acts may provide limits as to the shareholding, other than that provided in the
Central Act.

5. Restrictions on loans - Section 29 of the Central Act puts restriction on loan.
It states that a registered society shall not make a loan to any person other than a
member. However, with the special sanction of the Registrar, a registered society
may make a loan to another registered society.

The State Government may further put such restrictions as it thinks fit on the
loaning powers of the society to its members or to other societies in the interest of
the society concerned and its members.

6. Restrictions on borrowings - Section 30 of the Central Act further puts
restriction on borrowings. According to this section, a registered society shall
accept loans and deposits from persons who are not members subject to the
restrictions and limits of the bye-laws of the society. The auditor will have to
examine the bye-laws in this respect.

7. Investment of funds - According to section 32 of the Central Act, a society
may invest its funds in any one or more of the following:

(a) In the Central or State Co-operative Bank.

(b) In any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.

(c) In the shares, securities, bonds or debentures of any other society with limited
       liability.

(d) In any co-operative bank, other than a Central or State co-operative bank, as
       approved by the Registrar on specified terms and conditions.

(e) In any other moneys permitted by the Central or State Government.

In the principal provision relating to the investments of funds of a co-operative
society, the Central as well as State Acts does not mention anything about the
investment of reserve fund outside the business specifically.

8. Appropriation of profits - According to section 33 of the Central Act, a
prescribed percentage of the profits should be transferred to Reserve Fund, before
distribution as dividends or bonus to members.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.63
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

9. Contributions to Charitable Purposes - According to section 34, a
registered society may, with the sanction of the Registrar, contribute an amount
not exceeding 10% of the net profits remaining after the compulsory transfer to
the reserve fund for any charitable purpose as defined in section 2 of the Charitable
Endowments Act, 1890.

10. Investment of Reserve Fund outside the business or utilisation as
working capital - Some of the State Acts provide that a society may use the
Reserve Fund:

(a) in the business of a society, as working capital (subject to the rules made in
       this behalf).

(b) may invest as per provisions of the Act.

(c) may be used for some public purposes likely to promote the object of the
       society. The auditor should ensure strict compliance with the State Act and
       Rules in this regard.

11. Contribution to Education Fund - Some of the State Acts provide that every
society shall contribute annually towards the Education Fund of the State Federal
Society, at the appropriate rate as per the class of the society. Contribution to
Education Fund is a charge on profits and not an appropriation.

Apart from statutory provisions relating to Reserve Fund, the auditor may have
regard to the provisions in bye-laws and Rules and Regulations of the society
regarding the appropriation of profits. Transfers to other reserves, dividends to
members etc. are the other appropriations. Appropriations of profits must be
approved by the General Body of the society, which is the supreme authority in the
co-operative management. Further, it may be noted that necessary accounting
entries for the appropriation of profits must be passed after the date of approval
by the General Body. Here there is a departure from corporate accounting practice,
where entries are passed for proposed appropriations, subject to approval of
Annual General Meeting.

According to certain State Acts, transfers to Dividend Equalization Reserve and
Share Capital Redemption Fund are stated as charges against profits. According to the
generally accepted principles of accountancy these items are not charges, but

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.64  AUDITING AND ETHICS

appropriation of profits. The auditor should point out such spots where statutory
provisions of any law are in contradiction with the generally accepted accounting
principles.

13.3 Special Features of Co-Operative Audit

The general processes of auditing involved in audit work such as checking of
posting, ascertainment of arithmetical accuracy, vouching, verification of assets and
liabilities and final scrutiny of Balance Sheet are well known to the students, and the
same are to be applied in co-operative audit as well. It need not be discussed in
detail.

However, the special features of co-operative audit, to be borne in mind in general
while conducting the audit are as follows:

1. Examination of overdue debts - Overdue debts for a period from 6 months
to 5 years and more than 5 years will have to be classified and shall have to be
reported by an auditor. Overdue debts have far reaching consequences on the
working of a credit society. It affects its working capital position. A further analysis
of these overdue debts from the viewpoint of chances of recovery will have to be
made, and they will have to be classified as good or bad. The auditor will have to
ascertain whether proper provisions for doubtful debts are made and whether the
same is satisfactory.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.65
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

2. Overdue Interest - Overdue interest should be excluded from interest
outstanding and accrued due while calculating profit. Overdue interest is interest
accrued or accruing in accounts, the amount of which the principal is overdue. In
practice an overdue interest reserve is created and the credit of overdue interest
credited to interest account is reduced.

3. Certification of Bad Debts - A peculiar feature regarding the writing off of
the bad debts as per Maharashtra State Co-operative Rules, 1961, is very
interesting to note. As per the said rules, bad debts can be written off only when
they are certified as bad by the auditor. Bad debts and irrecoverable losses before
being written off against Bad Debts Funds, Reserve Fund etc. should be certified as
bad debts or irrecoverable losses by the auditor where the law so requires. Where
no such requirement exists, the managing committee of the society must authorise
the write-off.

4. Valuation of Assets and Liabilities - Regarding valuation of assets there are
no specific provisions or instructions under the Act and Rules and as such due regard
shall be had to the general principles of accounting and auditing conventions and
standards adopted. The auditor will have to ascertain existence, ownership and
valuation of assets. Fixed assets should be valued at cost less adequate provision
for depreciation. The incidental expenses incurred in the acquisition and the
installation expenses of assets should be properly capitalised. If the difference in
the original cost of acquisition and the present market price is of far reaching
significance, a note regarding the present market value may be appended; so as to
have a proper disclosure in the light of present inflatory conditions. The current
assets be valued at cost or market price, whichever is lower. Regarding the liabilities,
the auditor should see that all the known liabilities are brought into the account,
and the contingent liabilities are stated by way of a note.

5. Adherence to Co-operative Principles - The auditor will have to ascertain
in general, how far the objects, for which the co-operative organisation is set up,
have been achieved in the course of its working. The assessment is not necessarily
in terms of profits, but in terms of extending of benefits to members who have
formed the society. Considered from the viewpoint of social benefits it may be
looked into that how far the sales could be affected at lower prices. For the
achievement of these activities, cost accounting methods, store control methods,
techniques of standard costing, budgetary control etc. should be adopted. However,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.66  AUDITING AND ETHICS

these modern techniques are mostly not in application and as such in practice a
wide gap is found in the goals to be achieved and the actual achievements. While
auditing the expenses, the auditor should see that they are economically incurred
and there is no wastage of funds. Middlemen commissions are, as far as possible,
avoided and the purchases are made by the committee members directly from the
wholesalers. The principles of propriety audit should be followed for the purpose.

6. Observations of the Provisions of the Act and Rules - An auditor of a co-
operative society is required to point out the infringement with the provisions of
Co-operative Societies Act and Rules and bye-laws. The financial implications of
such infringements should be properly assessed by the auditor and they should be
reported. Some of the State Acts contain restrictions on payment of dividends, which
should be noted by the auditor.

7. Verification of Members' Register and examination of their pass books-
Examination of entries in members pass books regarding the loan given and its
repayments, and confirmation of loan balances in person is very much important in
a co-operative organisation to assure that the entries in the books of accounts are
free from manipulation. Specifically in the rural and agricultural credit societies,
members are not literate and as such this is a good safeguard on their part. Of
course this checking will be resorted to on a test basis, which is a matter of
judgement of the auditor.

8. Special report to the Registrar - During the course of audit, if the auditor
notices that there are some serious irregularities in the working of the society he
may report these special matters to the Registrar, drawing his specific attention to
the points. The Registrar on receipt of such a special report may take necessary
action against the society. In the following cases, for instance, a special report may
become necessary:

(i) Personal profiteering by members of managing committee in transactions of
       the society, which are ultimately detrimental to the interest of thesociety.

(ii) Detection of fraud relating to expenses, purchases, property and stores of the
       society.

(iii) Specific examples of mis-management. Decisions of management against co-
       operative principles.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT                                 9.67
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(iv) In the case of urban co-operative banks, disproportionate advances to vested
       interest groups, such as relatives of management, and deliberate negligence
       about the recovery thereof. Cases of reckless advancing, where the
       management is negligent about taking adequate security and proper
       safeguards for judging the credit worthiness of the party.

9. Audit classification of society - After a judgement of an overall performance
of the society, the auditor has to award a class to the society. This judgement is to be
based on the criteria specified by the Registrar. It may be noted here that if the
management of the society is not satisfied about the award of audit class, it can
make an appeal to the Registrar, and the Registrar may direct to review the audit
classification. The auditor should be very careful, while making a decision about the
class of society.

10. Discussion of draft audit report with managing committee - On
conclusion of the audit, the auditor should ask the Secretary of the society to
convene the managing committee meeting to discuss the audit draft report. The
audit report should never be finalised without discussion with the managing
committee. Minor irregularities may be got settled and rectified. Matters of policy
should be discussed in detail.

13.4 Audit, Inquiry and Inspection of Multi-State
       Co-Operative Societies

The Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, which came into force in August,
2002 applies to co-operative societies whose objects are not confined to one State.
The Act contains detailed provisions regarding registration, membership and
management of such societies. The funds of a Multi-State co-operative society
cannot be utilised for any political purpose. The Act contains detailed provisions
regarding the investment of funds and restrictions on loans, borrowings, etc.

                                                source :- qsstudy.com
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.68  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Books of Accounts - As per Multi-State Co-operative Society Rules 2002, every
Multi- State Co-operative society shall keep books of account with respect to-

a. all sum of money received and expended and matters in respect of which the
       receipt and expenditure take place;

b. all sale and purchase of goods;

c. the assets and liabilities;

d. in the case of a Multi-State Co-operative society engaged in production,
       processing and manufacturing, particulars relating to utilization of materials
       or labour or other items of cost as may be specified in the bye-hours of such
       a society.

               Diagram showing the Books of Accounts to be maintained by Multi State
                                                           Co-operative Society

13.4.1 Audit of Multi-State Co-operative Society ­
1. Qualification of Auditors - Section 72 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 states that a person who is a Chartered Accountant within the
meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 can only be appointed as auditor
of Multi-State co-operative society.
However the following persons are not eligible for appointment as auditors of a
Multi- State co-operative society-
(a) A body corporate.
(b) An officer or employee of the Multi-State co-operative society.
(c) A person who is a member or who is in the employment, of an officer or

       employee of the Multi-State co-operative society.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.69
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(d) A person who is indebted to the Multi-State co-operative society or who has
       given any guarantee or provided any security in connection with the
       indebtedness of any third person to the Multi-State co-operative society for
       an amount exceeding one thousand rupees.

If an auditor becomes subject, after his appointment, to any, of the disqualifications
specified above, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office as such.

2. Appointment of Auditors - Section 70 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 provides that the first auditor or auditors of a Multi-State co-
operative society shall be appointed by the board within one month of the date of
registration of such society and the auditor or auditors so appointed shall hold
office until the conclusion of the first annual general meeting. If the board fails to
exercise its powers under this sub-section, the Multi-State co-operative society in
the general meeting may appoint the first auditor or auditors.

The subsequent auditor or auditors are appointed by Multi-State co-operative
society, at each annual general meeting. The auditor or auditors so appointed shall
hold office from the conclusion of that meeting until the conclusion of the next
annual general meeting.

3. Power and duties of Auditors ­ Section 73 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 discusses the powers and duties of auditors. According to this,
every auditor of a Multi-State co-operative society shall have a right of access at
all times to the books accounts and vouchers of the Multi-State co-operative
society, whether kept at the head office of the Multi-State co-operative society or
elsewhere, and shall be entitled to require from the officers or other employees of
the Multi- State co-operative society such information and explanation as the
auditor may think necessary for the performance of his duties as an auditor.

As per section 73(2), the auditor shall make following inquiries:

(a) Whether loans and advances made by the Multi-State co-operative society
       on the basis of security have been properly secured and whether the terms on
       which they have been made are not prejudicial to the interests of the Multi-
       State co- operative society or its members,

(b) Whether transactions of the Multi-State co-operative society which are
       represented merely by book entries are not prejudicial to the interests of the
       Multi-State co-operative society,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.70  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(c) Whether personal expenses have been charged to revenue account, and

(d) Where it is Stated in the books and papers of the Multi-State co-operative
       society that any shares have been allotted for cash, whether cash has actually,
       been received in respect of such allotment, and if no cash has actually been
       so received, whether the position as stated in the account books and the
       balance sheet as correct regular and not misleading.

4. Content of Auditor's Report - As per sub-section (3) & (4) of section 73 of
Multi- state Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, the auditor shall make a report to the
members of the Multi-State co-operative society on the accounts examined by him
and on every balance-sheet and profit and loss account and on every other
document required to be part of or annexed to the balance-sheet or profit and loss
account, which are laid before the Multi-State co-operative society in general
meeting during his tenure of office, and the report shall state whether, in his opinion
and to the best of his information and according to the explanation given to him,
the said account give the information required by this act in the manner so
required, and give a true and fair view:

(a) In the case of the balance-sheet, of the state of the Multi-State co-operative
       society's affairs as at the end of its financial year; and

(b) In the case of the profit and loss account, of the profit or loss for its financial
       year.

The auditor's report shall also state:

(i) Whether he has obtained all the information and explanation which to the
       best of his knowledge and belief were necessary for the purpose of his audit.

(ii) Whether, in his opinion, proper books of account have been kept by the Multi-
       State co-operative society so far as appears from his examination of these
       books and proper returns adequate for the purpose of his audit have been
       received from branches or offices of the Multi-State co-operative society not
       visited by him.

(iii) Whether the report on the accounts of any branch office audited by a person
       other than the Multi-State co-operative society's auditor has been forwarded
       to him and how he has dealt with the same in preparing the auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.71
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(iv) Whether the Multi-State co-operative society's balance sheet and profit and
       loss account dealt with by the report are in agreement with the books of
       account and return.

Where any of the matters referred to in sub-section (3) or (4) is answered in the
negative or with a qualification, the auditor's report shall state the reason for the
answer.

5. Power of Central Government to direct special audit in certain cases -
Under section 77 of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, where the
Central Government is of the opinion:

(a) that the affairs of any Multi-State co-operative society are not being managed
       in accordance with self-help and mutual deed and co-operative principles or
       prudent commercial practices or with sound business principles; or

(b) that any Multi-State co-operative society is being managed in a manner likely
       to cause serious injury or damage to the interests of the trade industry or
       business to which it pertains; or

(c) that the financial position of any Multi-State co-operative society is such as
       to endanger its solvency.

      Diagram showing Power of Central Government to Direct Special Audit

1. Central Government's Order :-The Central Government may at any time by
order direct that a special audit of the Multi-State co-operative society's accounts
for such period or periods as may be specified in the order shall be conducted.
2. Appointment of the Auditor :-It may appoint either a chartered accountant
or the Multi-State co-operative society's auditor himself to conduct the special
audit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.72  AUDITING AND ETHICS

3. Shareholding Restriction :- However, Central Government shall order for
special audit only if that Government or the State Government either by itself or
both hold fifty-one percent or more of the paid-up share capital in such Multi-State
co-operative society.

4. Special Auditor's Powers, Duties & Report :- The special auditor shall have
the same powers and duties in relation to the special audit as an auditor of a Multi-
State co-operative society has under section 73. However the special auditor shall
instead of making his report to the members of the Multi-State co-operative society
make the report to the Central Government. The report of the special auditor shall,
include all the matters required to be included in the auditor's report under section
73 and any other matter as directed by the Central Government.

5. Action by the Central Government :- On receipts of the report of the special
auditor the Central Government may take such action on the report as it considers
necessary in accordance with the provision of the Act or any law for the time being
in force. However, if the Central Government does not take any action on the report
within four months from the date of its receipt, that Government shall send to the Multi-
State Co-operative society either a copy of, or relevant extract from, the report with its
comments thereon and require the Multi-State Co-operative society either to circulate
that copy or those extracts to the members or to have such copy or extracts read before
the Multi-State Co-operative society at its next general meeting.

6. Expenses pertaining to the Special Audit :- The expenses of, and incidental
to, any special audit under this section (including the remuneration of the special
auditor) shall be determined by the Central Government which determination shall
be final and paid by the Multi-State Co-operative society and in default of such
payment, shall be recoverable from the Multi-State Co-operative society as an arrear
of land revenue.

13.4.2 Inquiry by Central Registrar under Section 78

1. When:- The Central Registrar may, on a request from :-

       · a federal co-operative to which a Multi- State Co-operative society is
               affiliated or

       · a creditor or not less than one-third of the members of the board or

       · not less than one-fifth of the total number of members of a Multi-state
               co-operative society,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.73
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

2. How:- hold an inquiry or direct some person authorized by him by order in
writing in his behalf to hold an inquiry into the constitutions, working and financial
condition of a Multi-State Co-operative society.

3. Opportunity of being Heard:- However, before holding such inquiry fifteen
days notice must be given to the Multi-State co-operative society.

4. Powers given:- The Central Registrar or the person authorized by him shall
have the following powers, namely:

(a) he shall at all reasonable times have free access to the books, accounts,
       documents, securities, cash and other properties belonging to or in the
       custody of the Multi-State co-operative society and may summon any person
       in possession or responsible for the custody of any such books, accounts,
       documents securities, cash or other properties to produce the same at any
       place specified by him.

(b) he may, notwithstanding any bye-law specifying the period of notice for a
       general meeting of the Multi-State co-operative society, require the officers
       of the society to call a general meeting of the society by giving notice of not
       less than seven days at such time and place at the head quarters of the society
       to consider such matters as may be directed to him, and where the officers
       of the society refuse or fail to call such a meeting, he shall have power to call
       it himself.

(c) he may summon any person who is reasonably believed by him to have any
       knowledge of the affairs of the Multi-State co-operative society to appear
       before him at any place at the headquarters of the society or any branch
       thereof and may examine such person on oath.

5. Follow up:- The Central Registrar shall, within a period of three months of the
date of receipt of the report, communicate the report of inquiry to the Multi-State co-
operative society, the financial institutions, if any, to which the society is affiliated, and
to the person or authority, if any at whose instance the inquiry is needed.

13.5.3 Inspection of Multi-State Co-operative societies under
           Section 79

1. When:-The Central Registrar may, on a request from

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.74  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       · federal co-operative to which a Multi- State Co-operative society is
               affiliated or a creditor or

       · not less than one-third of the members of the board or

       · not less than one-fifth of the total number of members of a Multi-State
               co-operative society

2. How:- By general or special order in writing in this behalf inspect or direct
any person authorized by him by order in writing in this behalf to make an
inspection into the constitution, working and financial condition of a Multi- State
co-operative society.

3. Opportunity of Being heard:- No inspection shall be made unless a notice of
not less than fifteen days has been given to the multi-state co-operative society.

4. Powers available:-The Central Registrar or the person authorized by him
shall have the following powers:

(a) He shall at all times have access to all books, accounts, papers, vouchers,
       securities, stock and other property of that society and may, in the event of
       serious irregularities discovered during inspection, take them into custody
       and shall have power to verify the cash balance of the society and subject to
       the general or special order of the central registrar to call a meeting of the
       society where such general meeting is, in his opinion necessary.

(b) Every officer or member of a Multi-State Co-operative society shall furnish
       such information with regard to the working of the society as the central
       registrar or the person making such inspection may require.

5. Inspection Report:- A copy of the report of inspection under this section
shall be communicated to the Multi-State Co-operative society within a period of
three months from the date of completion of such inspection.

Test Your Understanding 4

A society has been formed by pan India employees of a public sector bank. The
purpose of society is to promote savings habits of members and to grant loan to
them up to a small specified amount. Small savings are promoted amongst
members by way of compulsory contribution from monthly salary. Identify type of
society and also discuss nature of books of accounts to be maintained by such a
society.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.75
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

    14. AUDIT OF TRUSTS & SOCIETIES

There are three basic legal forms of charitable entities under Indian law: trusts,
societies, and section 8 companies. The legal framework governing the charitable
institution will depend on the form of business organization the charitable
institution takes.

· If the charitable institution is formed as a Public Trust, it will be governed by
       the Public Trust Act applicable in the relevant State. However, if no Public
       Trust Act exists in that state, then the applicable legislation will be the Indian
       Trusts Act, 1882.

· If the charitable institution is formed as a Society, it will be governed by the
       Societies Registration Act, 1860.

· The charitable institution can also be formed as a non-profit company under
       section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.

· Apart from the above legislations, the Income Tax Act 1961 will be applicable
       to charitable institutions.

· And in the case of foreign contributions to these charitable institutions, the
       Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 will be applicable.

                                                      Source :- capindia.in

BOOKS OF ACCOUNT:- Charitable and religious trusts should maintain regular
books of account. This will enable management to demonstrate due discharge of
responsibilities they assume. The Auditor is required to report whether the Trust
has maintained proper books of accounts, including the following, namely: -
(i) cash book;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.76  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(ii) ledger;

(iii) journal;

(iv) copies of bills, whether machine numbered or otherwise serially numbered,
       wherever such bills are issued by the trust, and copies or counterfoils of
       machine numbered or otherwise serially numbered receipts issued by the
       trust;

(v) original bills wherever issued to the person and receipts in respect of
       payments made by the person;

(vi) any other book that may be required to be maintained in order to give a true
       and fair view of the state of the affairs of the person and explain the
       transactions effected;

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:- Every year the trust has to prepare financial
statements like the Balance sheet and Income and expenditure statements based
on its books of accounts. The format for preparation and presentation of financial
statements is prescribed under respective state laws. Charitable Organisations are
governed by different laws as well as different forms of organisations also
necessitate different accounting aspects to be complied.

Auditor's responsibility

The auditor should obtain the list of the books and records maintained by the Trust.
The list should be matched with the above requirement for maintaining mandatory
books and records as may be applicable in each case. The auditor should then verify
the records for the purpose of its audit. He has to comply with the Accounting
Standards (AS) and Standards on Auditing (SA) prescribed and made mandatory by
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. In giving his report the auditor will
have to use his professional skill and expertise and apply such audit tests as the
circumstances of the case may require, considering the contents of the audit report.
He will have to conduct the audit by applying the generally accepted auditing
procedures, which are applicable for any other audit. He can apply the test checks
depending on the evaluation of internal control procedures followed by the
assessee. The auditor will also have to keep in mind the concept of materiality
depending upon the circumstances of each case.

He should keep detailed notes about the evidence on which he has relied upon
while conducting the audit and also maintain all his working papers.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.77
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

Such working papers should include his notes on the following, amongst other
matters:

(a) work done while conducting the audit and by whom;

(b) explanation and information given to him during the course of the audit and
       by whom;

(c) decision on the various points taken;

(d) the judicial pronouncements relied upon by him while drafting the audit
       report; and

(e) certificates issued by the client / management letters.

It is important that the audit working papers prepared and/or obtained by the
auditor provide evidence that:

(i) the opinion expressed by the auditor is based on the examination made by
       him;

(ii) in arriving at his opinion, the auditor has given due cognizance to the
       information and explanations given by the assessee and that his opinion is
       not arbitrary;

(iii) the information and explanations obtained were full and complete that is, the
       auditor has called for all the information and explanations which were
       necessary to be considered before arriving at his opinion; and

(iv) the auditor did not merely rely upon the information or explanations given
       by the assessee but that he subjected such information and explanations to
       reasonable tests to verify their accuracy and completeness

TRUSTS

The auditor has to ascertain :-

(a) whether accounts are maintained regularly and in accordance with the
       provisions of the applicable Act and the rules;

(b) whether receipts and disbursements are properly and correctly shown in the
       accounts and money received in the form of donations is being applied as

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.78  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       per the objects of the trust and as per the specific direction by the donor, if
       any.

(c) whether the cash balance and vouchers in the custody of the manager or
       trustee on the date of audit were in agreement with the accounts;

(d) whether all books, deeds, accounts, vouchers or other documents or records
       required by the auditor were produced before him;

(e) whether a register of movable and immovable properties is maintained, the
       changes therein are communicated from time to time to the regional office,
       and the defects and inaccuracies mentioned in the previous audit report have
       been duly complied with and rectified.

(f) whether the manager or trustee or any other person required by the auditor
       to appear before him did so and furnished the necessary information required
       by him;

(g) whether any property or funds of the Trust were applied for any object or
       purpose other than the object or purpose of the Trust;

(h) the amounts of outstanding for more than one year and the amounts written
       off, if any;

(i) whether any money of the public trust has been invested contrary to the
       provisions of applicable Act which have come to the notice of the Auditor

(j) all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure, or failure or omission
       to recover monies or other property belonging to the public trust or of loss
       or waste of money or other property thereof, and whether such expenditure,
       failure, omission, loss or waste was caused in consequence of breach of trust
       or misapplication or any other misconduct on the part of the trustees or any
       other person while in the management of the trust

(k) whether the maximum and minimum number of the trustees is maintained;

(l) whether the meeting are held regularly as provided in such instrument

(m) whether the minute books of the proceedings of the meeting is maintained

(n) whether any of the trustees has any interest in the investment of the trust

(o) whether any of the trustees is a debtor or creditor of the trust.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.79
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(p) whether anonymous donations received are properly accounted for and
       donations in cash are not received by the Trust over and above the prescribed
       limit of accepting cash donations.

(q) whether the irregularities pointed out by the auditors in the accounts of the
       previous year have been duly complied with by the trustees during the period
       of audit ¬

(r) any special matter which the auditor may think fit or necessary to bring to
       the notice of the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner

SOCIETIES

The auditor's considerations:-

(a) The auditor should ascertain governing legislation of society i.e. Societies
       Registration act, 1860 or any applicable state law under which it has been
       registered.

(b) Object of society needs to be ascertained from its memorandum of
       association/bye laws. Its activities may include charitable, social, cultural or
       educational activities.

(c) Ascertain whether society has obtained registration under Foreign
       Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 in case foreign contributions are
       received.

(d) Ascertain whether it is also registered under relevant provisions of Income
       Tax Act which may make it eligible for tax exemption on its income.

(e) Obtain an understanding of internal control to design audit procedures with
       special reference to donations and various expenditures incurred in relation
       to achievements of objects of society.

(f) Evaluate appropriateness of accounting policies with special reference to
       donations and grants. Also evaluate accounting policies in relation to specific
       grants.

(g) In case some expenses incurred by society are reimbursed by donors,
       ascertain how these are recognized in financial statements.

(h) Ascertain, if any inquiry has been held by Registrar under applicable law in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.80  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       the working or financial condition of society and its implications for auditor's
       opinion.

(i) Ascertain all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure or failure or
       omission to recover monies or other property belonging to society or of loss
       or waste of money or other property thereof.

(j) Ascertain whether such expenditure or waste was caused in consequence of
       breach of trust or misapplication or any other misconduct on the part of
       governing body.

CASE STUDY

Consider the following five descriptions: -

(A) Audit of "Implementation of Nagpur Metro Rail Project" was conducted by
       the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

       Following is extract of few audit findings placed on website cag.gov.in.

       "The location of New Airport station was not ideal from the viewpoint of
       ridership due to sparse population in and around the station and also from
       the accessibility point of view.

       Cotton Market station, the second additional station was projected to have
       high peak hour peak direction trips but the work was kept on hold midway
       citing fund crunch due to non-release of pending contribution from
       stakeholders. However, the situation could have been managed through
       prioritization of works."

(B) Another set of audit findings in respect of audit of Haryana Power Generation
       Corporation Limited, a wholly owned government company responsible for
       operation of power generation plants in state of Haryana is as under: -

       "The main reason for low generation was higher variable cost of thermal
       power stations which resulted in backing down of plants."

(C) A report was tabled in Parliament highlighting main features of direct taxes
       administration of country as mandated in Constitution of India. This report
       primarily discussed compliance to the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961
       and the associated rules and procedures etc. as applied to administration of
       direct taxes including irregularities noticed in finalizing assessments etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.81
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(D) Radial finance corporation Limited is a government company. The audit of
       the company is conducted by statutory auditors appointed by Comptroller
       and Auditor General of India.

(E) Bharat Insurance Company Limited is a general insurance government owned
       company. The statutory auditor is appointed by Comptroller and Auditor
       General of India.

       The annual report for a particular year also contains comments of statutory
       auditors on matters such as whether company has carried out reconciliations
       in respect of its inter-company balances with other government owned
       insurance companies.

Based on above, answer following questions:

(1) Based upon plain reading of audit findings stated at Para (A), identify type of
       audit carried out by office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
       (a) Audit against provision of funds
       (b) Propriety audit
       (c) Performance audit
       (d) Compliance audit

(2) Keeping in view audit findings in respect of Haryana Power Generation
       Corporation Limited, identify type of audit carried out.
       (a) Audit of Government Company
       (b) Audit against rules and orders
       (c) Compliance audit
       (d) Performance audit

(3) Which of the following is the most appropriate statement in context of report
       tabled in Parliament regarding administration of direct taxes?
       (a) It is likely to be a report prepared for submission to the President under
               Article 151 of the Constitution of India by Comptroller and Auditor
               General of India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.82  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (b) It is likely to be a report prepared for submission to the Prime Minister
               under Article 151 of the Constitution of India by an independent task
               force of experts.

       (c) It is likely to be a report prepared for submission to the President under
               Article 151 of the Constitution of India by Central Board of Direct Taxes.

       (d) It is likely to be a report prepared for submission to the Prime Minister
               under Article 151 of the Constitution of India by Central Board of Direct
               Taxes.

(4) Who is empowered to conduct "supplementary audit" in case of Radial finance
       Corporation Limited, a government company?

       (a) Central Government

       (b) Another independent auditor appointed by CAG

       (c) CAG

       (d) Another independent auditor appointed by Ministry of Corporate Affairs

(5) As regards comments of auditors specified in respect of audit report of above
       insurance company, which of the following is likely to be most appropriate
       statement?

       (a) Such are likely to be comments of test audit carried out by CAG.

       (b) Such are likely to be comments in respect of directions to statutory
               auditor by CAG for reporting on specific aspect of their audit work.

       (c) Such are likely to be comments of supplementary audit carried out by
               CAG

       (d) Such are likely to be comments of statutory auditors in accordance with
               requirements of Standards on Auditing

Answers to Questions involving case study

1. c 2. d 3. a 4. c 5. b

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.83
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

SUMMARY

 The main objective of government audit is a combination of ensuring
       accountability of administration to legislature and functioning as an aid to
       administration.

 In India, the function of Government Audit is discharged by the independent
       statutory authority of the Comptroller and Auditor General through the
       agency of the Indian Audit and Accounts Department.

 The Constitution guarantees the independence of the C&AG of India by
       prescribing that he shall be appointed by the President of India and shall not
       be removed from office except on the ground of proven mis-behaviour or
       incapacity.

 Besides conducting audit of receipts and expenditure of government, the
       Comptroller and Auditor General of India has power for appointment of
       auditors of government companies. He has the power to conduct
       supplementary audits of such government companies.

 The Local Fund Audit Wing of the State Govt. is generally in-charge of the
       audit of municipal accounts.

 NGOs can be defined as non-profit making organisations which raise funds
       from members, donors or contributors apart from receiving donation of time,
       energy and skills for achieving their social objectives like imparting education,
       providing medical facilities, economic assistance to poor, managing disasters
       and emergent situations. Auditors of NGOs receiving foreign funds should
       pay special attention to compliance by NGO with Foreign Contribution
       (Regulation) Act, 2010.

 LLP is governed by the Limited Liability Partnership Act 2008, It is a form of
       business organisation which enshrines in itself the advantages of both the
       Company and Partnership forms of Organisation. Minimum of 2 Partners can
       form an LLP. The auditor of a LLP has to pay attention to compliance by LLP
       of the above law.

 In case of audits of charitable institutions, hospitals, clubs and hotels, special
       attention should be paid by auditors with respect to their constitution and
       type of activities these entities are engaged in.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.84  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 Co-operative society is a business organisation with a special mode of doing
       business, by pulling together all the means of production co-operatively,
       elimination of middlemen and exploitation from outside forces.

 The Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, applies to co-operative
       societies whose objects are not confined to one State.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQs based Questions

(1) The audit of municipal corporation of a large metro city is in progress. Which
       of the following is not likely an objective of such as audit?
       (a) To report on the adherence to legal and administrative requirements
       (b) To report on whether value is being fully received for money spent
       (c) To report on the weakness of systems of financial control
       (d) To provide better civic amenities to residents of metro city

(2) "Save Democracy" is an NGO working in cause of promoting democracy and
       democratic institutions in many countries including India. Its Indian
       counterpart has received funds from a renowned "Flower Trust" of US. As
       auditor of NGO, which of the following laws/orders would be relevant to you in
       context of above information?
       (a) Income Tax Act, 1961
       (b) Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 2010
       (c) Companies Act, 2013
       (d) Orders issued by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment

(3) The appointment of first auditor of a multi-state cooperative society is made
       by: -
       (a) Central Registrar
       (b) Board of society
       (c) Members of society
       (d) Central Government

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.85
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(4) Consider following revenue sources of Union Government.
       (P) Revenues from direct taxes
       (Q) Revenues from Goods and Services Tax
       (R) Revenues from Custom Duties
       (S) Revenues from Excise Duties
       Out of P, Q, R and S, which of the following flow to "Consolidated Fund of
       India"?
       (a) P, Q and R
       (b) P, Q and S
       (c) P and Q
       (d) P, Q, R and S

(5) An LLP files compliance returns with: -
       (a) Registrar of firms & societies
       (b) Central Registrar
       (c) Registrar of Companies
       (d) Local fund audit wing

Correct / Incorrect :-

State with reasons (in short) whether the following statement is correct or
incorrect:

(1) Article 150 of the Constitution provides that the accounts of the Union and of
       the States shall be kept in such form as the Finance Minister may on the advice
       of the C&AG prescribe.

(2) According to `propriety audit', the auditors try to bring out cases of improper,
       avoidable, or infructuous expenditure even though the expenditure has been
       incurred in conformity with the existing rules and regulations.

(3) Expenditure incurred by the municipalities and corporations can be broadly
       classified under the following heads: (a) general administration and revenue

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.86  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       collection, (b) public health, (c) public safety, (d) education, (e) public works,
       and (f) others such as interest payments.

(4) The external control of municipal expenditure is exercised by the Central
       Government through the appointment of auditors to examine municipal
       accounts.

(5) NGOs may be defined as non-profit making organisations which raise funds
       from members, donors or contributors apart from receiving donation of time,
       energy and skills for achieving their social objectives.

(6) The accounts of every LLP shall be audited in accordance with rule 24 of LLP
       Rules 2009.

(7) The auditor of an LLP may be appointed by the Designated Partners or other
       Partners whosoever is available at the time of appointment.

(8) The Comptroller and Auditor General does not have any authority to audit the
       accounts of stores and inventory kept in any office or department of the Union
       or of a State .

(9) An Operating Lease is a kind of Financing arrangement.

(10) An auditor should ensure that proper valuation of occupancy-in-progress at the
       balance sheet date is made and included in the accounts in the case of audit of
       a Hotel.

(11) The first auditor of a Multi-State co-operative Society will be appointed in
       Annual General Meeting.

(12) Small LLPs are mandatorily required to get their Books of account audited.

Theoretical Questions

(1) Discuss, in what circumstances, Central Registrar can hold an inquiry into
       working and financial condition of a multi-state cooperative society.

(2) Sporting Club of India is a private club engaged in promotion of sports in the
       country. As an auditor of this leading club, discuss any two points to ensure
       that expenditure incurred by club during the year is properly authorised.

(3) Tomo Construction Engineering LLP approached CA K to understand various
       returns to be filed by them as part of statutory compliance. Discuss, how, CA
       K should advise them.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.87
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(4) CA Irfan Zaidi is auditor of a prestigious five-star hotel in Jaipur. He notices
       that there is a gift shop doing brisk business inside the hotel premises. On
       further enquiries, he comes to know that stocks in gift shop belong to gift shop
       owner and hotel receives rent for letting out this space. Discuss, how, auditor
       can verify payment of common amenities used by gift shop owner to the hotel.

(5) A muti-speciality hospital has come up in your city. You are appointed as
       auditor for first year. Discuss, any four, broad areas to be kept in mind while
       conducting audit of accounts of such a newly opened multi-speciality hospital.

(6) You have been appointed as an auditor of an NGO, briefly state the points on
       which you would concentrate while planning the audit of such an organisation?

(7) The general transactions of a hospital include patient treatment, collection of
       receipts, donations, capital expenditures. You are required to mention special
       points of consideration while auditing such transactions of a hospital?

(8) Mention the special points to be examined by the auditor in the audit of a
       charitable institution running hostel for students pursuing the Chartered
       Accountancy Course and which charges only INR 500 per month from a student
       for their lodging/boarding.

(9) Explain in detail the duties of Comptroller and Auditor General of India

(10) An NGO operating in Delhi had collected large scale donations for Tsunami
       victims. The donations so collected were sent to different NGOs operating in
       Tamil Nadu for relief operations. This NGO operating in Delhi has appointed
       you to audit its accounts for the year in which it collected and remitted
       donations for Tsunami victims. Draft audit programme for audit of receipts of
       donations and remittance of the collected amount to different NGOs. Mention
       six points each, peculiar to the situation, which you will like to incorporate in
       your audit programme for audit of said receipts and remittances of donations.

(11) As an auditor, what would be your areas of consideration while auditing the
       element of ROOM SALES during the audit of a 5-Star Hotel.

(12) You are auditing the Books of accounts of Karla Multiplex which runs 15 Film
       shows everyday. One of the major issues which are of concern to you as an
       auditor is the Agreement entered into the Multiplex owners with the Film
       Distributors. State what points would you check as an auditor in this respect.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.88  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(13) Define Government Audit & explain its objectives.

(14) CA A is appointed as the auditor of a charitable institutions. Discuss the audit
       procedure undertaken by him while auditing the Subscription and Donation
       received by the charitable institution.

(15) In case of Government entities, audit of accounts of stores and inventories has been
       developed as a part of expenditure audit. Discuss about the duties and
       responsibilities entrusted to C&AG.

(6) Local Fund Audit Wing of a State of a State Government has appointed you to
       audit the accounts of one of the Local body governed by it. As an auditor, what
       will be your reporting areas?

(17) You have been appointed as an auditor of VJM Schools. Discuss the points which
       merit your consideration as an auditor while verifying Assets and Liabilities of VJM
       Schools.

(18) State the points which merit consideration in the audit of a CLUB w.r.t its members.

ANSWERS / SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs based Questions

1. d 2. b 3. b 4. d 5. c

Answers to Correct/Incorrect:-

1. Incorrect- Article 150 of the Constitution provides that the accounts of the
       Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the President may on
       the advice of the C&AG prescribe.

2. Correct- According to `propriety audit', the auditors try to bring out cases of
       improper, avoidable, or infructuous expenditure even though the expenditure
       has been incurred in conformity with the existing rules and regulations i.e.
       the expenditure is incurred with due regard to broad and general principles
       of financial propriety.

3. Correct- Expenditure incurred by the municipalities and corporations can be
       broadly classified under the following heads: (a) general administration and
       revenue collection, (b) public health, (c) public safety, (d) education, (e) public

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.89
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

       works, and (f) others such as interest payments, etc., mostly related to civic
       amenities and local area development and maintenance.

4. Incorrect- The external control of municipal expenditure is exercised by the
       state governments through the appointment of auditors to examine
       municipal accounts. However, the municipal corporations of Delhi, Mumbai
       and a few others have powers to appoint their own auditors for regular
       external audit.

5. Correct- NGOs can be defined as non-profit making organisations which
       raise funds from members, donors or contributors apart from receiving
       donation of time, energy and skills for achieving their social objectives like
       imparting education, providing medical facilities, economic assistance to
       poor, managing disasters and emergent situations. These would include
       religious organisations, voluntary health and welfare agencies, charitable
       organisations, hospitals, old age homes, research foundations etc. The scope
       of services rendered by NGOs is extremely wide.

6. Incorrect- Rule 24 of LLP Rules 2009 provides that any LLP, whose turnover
       does not exceed, in any financial year, forty lakh rupees, or whose
       contribution does not exceed twenty five lakh rupees, is not required to get
       its accounts audited. However, if the partners of such limited liability
       partnership decide to get the accounts of such LLP audited, the accounts shall
       be audited only in accordance with such rules.

7. Incorrect- The auditor is to be appointed by the designated partners of the
       LLP. However, the Partners may appoint the auditors only if the Designated
       Partners have failed to appoint them.

8. Incorrect- The Comptroller and Auditor General shall have authority to audit
       and report on the accounts of stores and inventory kept in any office or
       department of the Union or of a State. Audit of the accounts of stores and
       inventories has been developed as a part of expenditure audit with reference
       to the duties and responsibilities entrusted to C&AG.

9. Incorrect- A Finance Lease is a Financing arrangement. An Operating lease,
       on the other hand, is a simple arrangement where, in return for rent, the lessor
       allows the lessee to use the asset for a certain period.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.90  AUDITING AND ETHICS

10. Correct- The auditor should ensure that proper valuation of occupancy-in-
       progress at the balance sheet date is made and included in the accounts for
       proper recording of closing and opening entries and maintenance of
       accounts on Accrual basis as per the Matching concept.

11. Incorrect- Section 70 of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002
       provides that the first auditor or auditors of a Multi-State co-operative society
       shall be appointed by the board within one month of the date of registration
       of such society and the auditor or auditors so appointed shall hold office until
       the conclusion of the first annual general meeting. If the board fails to
       exercise its powers under this sub-section, the Multi-State Co-operative
       Society in the general meeting may appoint the first auditor or auditors.

12. Incorrect- The accounts of every LLP shall be audited in accordance with Rule
       24 of LLP, Rules 2009, which provide that any LLP whose turnover does not
       exceed, in any financial year, forty lakh rupees, or whose contribution does
       not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees, is not required to get its accounts
       audited. Further , a Small LLP is any LLP the Contribution of which, does not
       exceed twenty-five lakh rupees (INR 25,00,000) or such higher amount, not
       exceeding five crore rupees, as may be prescribed; and the Turnover of which,
       as per the Statement of Accounts and Solvency for the immediately
       preceding financial year, does not exceed forty lakh rupees (INR 40,00,000)
       or such higher amount, not exceeding fifty crore rupees, as may be
       prescribed; Hence, the provisions of audit are not applicable on Small LLP's.
       Therefore, the Small LLPs can prepare its financial statement merely with the
       signatures of the Designated Partners.

Answers to the Theoretical Questions

(1) Refer to topic on Inquiry by Central Registrar

(2) Refer to topic on audit of club

(3) Refer to topic on Basics of LLPs audit

(4) Refer to topic on audit of Hotels

(5) Refer to topic on audit of Hospitals

(6) Refer to topic on audit of NGOs

(7) Refer to topic on audit of Hospitals

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.91
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

(8) Refer to topic on audit of Charitable Institutions

(9) Refer to topic on audit of Government Audit

(10) Receipt of Donations:

       (i) Internal Control System: Existence of internal control system
               particularly with reference to division of responsibilities in respect of
               authorised collection of donations, custody of receipt books and safe
               custody of money.

       (ii) Custody of Receipt Books: Existence of system regarding issue of
               receipt books, whether unused receipt books are returned and the same
               are verified physically including checking of number of receipt books
               and sequence of numbering therein.

       (iii) Receipt of Cheques: Receipt Book should have carbon copy for duplicate
               receipt and signed by a responsible official. All details relating to date of
               cheque, bank's name, date, amount, etc. should be clearly stated.

       (iv) Bank Reconciliation: Reconciliation of bank statements with reference
               to all cash deposits not only with reference to date and amount but also
               with reference to receipt book.

       (v) Cash Receipts: Register of cash donations to be vouched more
               extensively. If addresses are available of donors who had given cash,
               the same may be cross-checked by asking entity to post thank you letters
               mentioning amount, date and receipt number.

       (vi) Foreign Contributions, if any, to receive special attention to
               compliance with applicable laws and regulations.

       Remittance of Donations to Different NGOs:

       (i) Mode of Sending Remittance: All remittances are through account
               payee cheques. Remittances through Demand Draft would also need to
               be scrutinised thoroughly with reference to recipient.

       (ii) Confirming Receipt of Remittance: All remittances are supported by
               receipts and acknowledgements.

       (iii) Identity: Recipient NGO is a genuine entity. Verify address, 80G
               Registration Number, etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.92  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (iv) Direct Confirmation Procedure: Send confirmation letters to entities
               to whom donations have been paid.

       (v) Donation Utilisation: Utilisation of donations for providing relief to
               Tsunami victims and not for any other purpose.

       (vi) System of NGOs' Selection: System for selecting NGO to whom
               donations have been sent.

(11) Refer to topic on audit of Hotel

(12) Refer to topic on audit of Cinema Hall

(13) Refer to topic on audit of Government Audit

(14) Refer to topic on audit of Charitable Institutions

(15) Refer to topic on audit of Government Audit

(16) Refer to topic on audit of Local Bodies

[17) Refer to topic on audit of Educational Institutions

(18) Refer to topic on audit of Club

Answers to Questions involving Test your Understanding:

(1) Consolidated Fund of India consists of all the revenue received from direct
       and indirect taxes, all the loans taken by the Govt. of India and all the amount
       of repayment of loans received by the Govt. of India. Its importance lies in
       the fact that all government expenditure is incurred from this fund. No
       moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be appropriated except
       in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in
       the Constitution.

(2) The auditor shall consider provisions of retirement deed/partnership deed for
       date of retiring and joining of partners. It should be ensured that profits are
       appropriately distributed up to date of retirement. Further, profits after
       retirement should have been distributed among partners as per terms of new
       partnership deed.

(3) The fees concessions have to be under proper authority of school
       management. The auditor would verify internal controls in this regard.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPECIAL FEATURES OF AUDIT OF DIFFERENT               9.93
                                  TYPES OF ENTITIES

       Besides, detailed checking of few cases needs to be undertaken to ensure
       genuineness of fees concessions and proper management approvals.

(4) The society is in nature of Multi-state cooperative society as it serves interests
       of members in more than one state. It accepts small savings from its
       members and grants loan to members. As per Multi-State Co-operative
       Society Rules 2002, every Multi- State Co-operative society shall keep books
       of account with respect to: -

       a. all sum of money received and expended and matters in respect of
               which the receipt and expenditure take place

       b. the assets and liabilities

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
