CHAPTER  a  7

COMPLETION AND
REVIEW

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand-

 Meaning of "Subsequent Events"
 SA 560- Subsequent Events
 Meaning of "Going Concern" and its significance
 SA 570- Going Concern
 SA 450- Evaluation of misstatements identified during the audit
 Meaning of Written representations
 SA 580-Written representations
 Significance of Communication with Those charged with governance
 Overview of SA 260 -concerning Communication with Those charged

       with governance
 Necessity of communication of significant deficiencies in internal

       control
 Overview of SA 265- Communicating Deficiencies in Internal Control to

       Those Charged with Governance and Management
 Practicality of above concepts using examples and case studies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a       7.2  AUDITING AND ETHICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

            · COMMUNICATION WITH THOSE CHARGED WITH
SA 260 GOVERNANCE

SA 265  · COMMUNICATING DEFICIENCIES IN INTERNAL
          CONTROL TO THOSE CHARGED WITH
          GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT

            · EVALUATIONS OF MISSTATEMENTS IDENTIFIED
SA 450 DURING THE AUDIT

        · SUBSEQUENT EVENTS

SA 560

        · GOING CONCERN

SA 570

        · WRITTEN REPRESENTATIONS

SA 580

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW  7.3  a

Excited as he was, to know outcome of audit his friend Shekhar was part of, Sameer
called him up one day. He came to know that substantive procedures have already
been performed and audit is in its last leg of completion. A question arose in his
mind. Is something more to be done? Are there still some procedures left to be
performed?

It is in this context, he came to know about "Subsequent events". He was under the
impression that audit is concerned only with events occurring up to date of financial
statements. However, he rued his elementary understanding. Not only auditor is
concerned with events occurring up to date of financial statements, he has also to
deal with effects of events occurring up to date of auditor's report. Even after
signing audit report, if auditor becomes aware of certain facts, he has to take
necessary steps in certain situations. What are those steps and situations?

Apart from this, auditor has to assess whether use of going concern assumption by
management in preparation of financial statements is appropriate. Applying his
accountancy knowledge of AS 1, he remembered that it is one of the three
fundamental accounting assumptions. It means that an enterprise will continue to
be in business in foreseeable future. It is the basic assumption which affects how
financial statements of an enterprise are prepared. Wow! That is why it is so
important for auditors.

He was also considering whether misstatements found during audit have to be
informed to the management first. Why it is necessary to do so? The reason behind
it must be to provide an opportunity to management to correct those
misstatements. Another reason could be of judging response of management to
such misstatements. Something new may come to knowledge of auditors before he
forms opinion and signs on dotted lines.

Remembering that audit suffers from inherent limitations, he knew that audit
procedures are not completely fool-proof. An auditor may falter due to limitations
of procedures themselves or due to their faulty selection. In such a case, how can
auditor be sure of everything, of completeness of information, of recording of all
transactions? That is where written representations come in the picture.

He has understood now reason for lull period in the audit and why an auditor takes
time to sign report.

There are still procedures to be performed by auditor after completion of
substantive procedures involving detailed checking. An auditor has to deal with

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.4  AUDITING AND ETHICS

effect of subsequent events. He has to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence
regarding appropriateness of use by management of going concern assumption in
preparation of financial statements. Misstatements identified during audit have to
be evaluated and communicated. Communication regarding significant audit
findings and other matters is made to those charged with governance. Written
representations are obtained. All such procedures are performed before signing of
audit report.

     1. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS

Events occurring between the date of the financial statements and the date of the
auditor's report and facts that become known to the auditor after the date of the
auditor's report are known as subsequent events.

Consider case of a company which may have planned an agreement to merge
between the date of the financial statements and the date of the auditor's report.
Or a fire claim amount of an entity receivable from insurance company as on date
of financial statements may have been settled at a reduced amount before date of
auditor's report. These are some of the examples of subsequent events.

Financial statements may be affected by certain events that occur after the date of
the financial statements. Many financial reporting frameworks specifically refer to
such events. Such financial reporting frameworks ordinarily identify two types of
events: -

(a) Those that provide evidence of conditions that existed at the date of the
       financial statements and

(b) Those that provide evidence of conditions that arose after the date of the
       financial statements.

Examples of events providing evidence of conditions that existed at the date
of the financial statements

· Declaration of insolvency of a major debtor of the entity between the date of
       financial statements and the date of auditor's report providing evidence on
       the recoverability of the money due from debtor as on date of the financial
       statements.

· Settling a legal claim outside the court at a reduced amount between the date
       of financial statements and the date of auditor's report for which provision

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                          COMPLETION AND REVIEW            7.5  a

       has already been made in financial statements. It provides evidence on
       adjustment in provision amount already made in financial statements, if any.

Examples of events providing evidence of conditions that arose after the date
of the financial statements

· Issue of new share capital.

· Planned merger of the company.

· Destruction of substantial inventories due to fire between the date of the
       financial statements and the date of auditor's report.

                          Subsequent events

     Events occuring      Facts which become known to       Facts which become
 between the date of       the auditor after the date of   known to the auditor
the financial statements  the auditor's report but before
  and the date of the                                         after the financial
                                the date the financial     statements have been
     auditor's report          statements are issued
                                                                     issued

1.1 SA 560 Subsequent Events

SA 560 deals with the auditor's responsibilities relating to subsequent events in an
audit of financial statements.

1.2 Objectives of auditor in accordance with SA 560

The objectives of the auditor are to: -

(a) Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence about whether events occurring
       between the date of the financial statements and the date of the auditor's
       report that require adjustment of, or disclosure in, the financial statements
       are appropriately reflected in those financial statements and

(b) Respond appropriately to facts that become known to the auditor after the
       date of the auditor's report, that, had they been known to the auditor at that
       date, may have caused the auditor to amend the auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.6  AUDITING AND ETHICS

1.3 Audit procedures relating to events occurring between
      the date of the financial statements and the date of the
      auditor's report

The auditor shall perform audit procedures designed to obtain sufficient
appropriate audit evidence that all events occurring between the date of the
financial statements and the date of the auditor's report that require adjustment
of, or disclosure in, the financial statements have been identified. The auditor is
not, however, expected to perform additional audit procedures on matters to which
previously applied audit procedures have provided satisfactory conclusions.

The auditor shall perform the procedures required above so that they cover the
period from the date of the financial statements to the date of the auditor's report,
or as near as practicable thereto. The auditor shall take into account the auditor's
risk assessment in determining the nature and extent of such audit procedures,
which shall include the following: -

(a) Obtaining an understanding of any procedures management has established
       to ensure that subsequent events are identified.

(b) Inquiring of management and, where appropriate, those charged with
       governance as to whether any subsequent events have occurred which might
       affect the financial statements.

(c) Reading minutes, if any, of the meetings, of the entity's owners, management
       and those charged with governance, that have been held after the date of the
       financial statements and inquiring about matters discussed at any such
       meetings for which minutes are not yet available.

(d) Reading the entity's latest subsequent interim financial statements, if any.

Such information may also be obtained by auditor from accounting records
pertaining to period after date of financial statements, reading entity's latest
available budgets etc.

When, as a result of the procedures performed, the auditor identifies events that
require adjustment of, or disclosure in, the financial statements, the auditor shall
determine whether each such event is appropriately reflected in those financial
statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.7  a

The auditor shall request management and, where appropriate, those charged with
governance, to provide a written representation in accordance with SA 580,
"Written Representations" that all events occurring subsequent to the date of the
financial statements and for which the applicable financial reporting framework
requires adjustment or disclosure have been adjusted or disclosed.

Meaning of "Date the financial statements are issued"

It reflects the date that the auditor's report and audited financial statements are
made available to third parties. The date the financial statements are issued
generally depends on the regulatory environment of the entity. In some
circumstances, the date the financial statements are issued may be the date that
they are filed with a regulatory authority. Since audited financial statements cannot
be issued without an auditor's report, the date that the audited financial statements
are issued must not only be at or later than the date of the auditor's report, but
must also be at or later than the date the auditor's report is provided to the entity.

1.4 Facts which become known to the auditor after the
      date of the auditor's report but before the date the
      financial statements are issued

The auditor has no obligation to perform any audit procedures regarding the
financial statements after the date of the auditor's report. However, when, after the
date of the auditor's report but before the date the financial statements are issued,
a fact becomes known to the auditor that, had it been known to the auditor at the
date of the auditor's report, may have caused the auditor to amend the auditor's
report, the auditor shall:

(a) Discuss the matter with management and, where appropriate, those charged
       with governance.

(b) Determine whether the financial statements need amendment and, if so,

(c) Inquire how management intends to address the matter in the financial
       statements.

If management amends the financial statements, the auditor shall:

(a) Carry out the audit procedures necessary in the circumstances on the
       amendment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.8  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(b) Unless the circumstances in succeeding para apply: -

       (i) Extend the audit procedures, already referred, to the date of the new
               auditor's report and

       (ii) Provide a new auditor's report on the amended financial statements.

The new auditor's report shall not be dated earlier than the date of approval of the
amended financial statements.

When law, regulation or the financial reporting framework does not prohibit
management from restricting the amendment of the financial statements to the
effects of the subsequent events or events causing that amendments and those
responsible for approving the financial statements are not prohibited from
restricting their approval to that amendment, the auditor is permitted to restrict
the audit procedures on subsequent events to that amendment. In such cases, the
auditor shall either: -

(a) Amend the auditor's report to include an additional date restricted to that
       amendment that thereby indicates that the auditor's procedures on
       subsequent events are restricted solely to the amendment of the financial
       statements described in the relevant note to the financial statements or

(b) Provide a new or amended auditor's report that includes a statement in an
       Emphasis of Matter paragraph or Other Matter(s) paragraph that conveys that
       auditor's procedures on subsequent events are restricted solely to the
       amendment of the financial statements as described in the relevant note to
       the financial statements.

In some entities, management may not be required by the applicable law,
regulation or the financial reporting framework to issue amended financial
statements and, accordingly, the auditor need not provide an amended or new
auditor's report. However, when management does not amend the financial
statements in circumstances where the auditor believes they need to be amended,
then: -

(a) If the auditor's report has not yet been provided to the entity, the auditor
       shall modify the opinion as required by SA 705 and then provide the auditor's
       report or

(b) If the auditor's report has already been provided to the entity, the auditor
       shall notify management and, unless all of those charged with governance

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.9  a

       are involved in managing the entity, those charged with governance, not to
       issue the financial statements to third parties before the necessary
       amendments have been made. If the financial statements are nevertheless
       subsequently issued without the necessary amendments, the auditor shall
       take appropriate action, to seek to prevent reliance on the auditor's report.

1.5 Facts which become known to the auditor after the
      financial statements have been issued

After the financial statements have been issued, the auditor has no obligation to
perform any audit procedures regarding such financial statements. However, when,
after the financial statements have been issued, a fact becomes known to the
auditor that, had it been known to the auditor at the date of the auditor's report,
may have caused the auditor to amend the auditor's report, the auditor shall: -

(a) Discuss the matter with management and, where appropriate, those charged
       with governance.

(b) Determine whether the financial statements need amendment and, if so,

(c) Inquire how management intends to address the matter in the financial
       statements.

If the management amends the financial statements, the auditor shall: -

(a) Carry out the audit procedures necessary in the circumstances on the
       amendment.

(b) Review the steps taken by management to ensure that anyone in receipt of
       the previously issued financial statements together with the auditor's report
       thereon is informed of the situation.

(c) Unless such circumstances when law, regulation or the financial reporting
       framework does not prohibit management from restricting the amendment
       of the financial statements to the effects of the subsequent events or events
       causing that amendments and those responsible for approving the financial
       statements are not prohibited from restricting their approval to that
       amendment apply: -

       (i) Extend the audit procedures, already referred, to the date of the new
               auditor's report, and the date the new auditor's report no earlier than
               the date of approval of the amended financial statements and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.10  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(ii) Provide a new auditor's report on the amended financial statements.

(d) When the circumstances are such that law, regulation or the financial
       reporting framework does not prohibit management from restricting the
       amendment of the financial statements to the effects of the subsequent
       events or events causing that amendments and those responsible for
       approving the financial statements are not prohibited from restricting their
       approval to that amendment, amend the auditor's report, or provide a new
       auditor's report as already discussed.

The auditor shall include in the new or amended auditor's report an Emphasis of
Matter paragraph or Other Matter(s) paragraph referring to a note to the financial
statements that more extensively discusses the reason for the amendment of the
previously issued financial statements and to the earlier report provided by the
auditor.

If management does not take the necessary steps to ensure that anyone in receipt
of the previously issued financial statements is informed of the situation and does
not amend the financial statements in circumstances where the auditor believes
they need to be amended, the auditor shall notify management and, unless all of
those charged with governance are involved in managing the entity, those charged
with governance, that the auditor will seek to prevent future reliance on the
auditor's report.

If, despite such notification, management or those charged with governance do not
take these necessary steps, the auditor shall take appropriate action to seek to
prevent reliance on the auditor's report.

(A) Overview of auditor's responsibilities regarding subsequent events
       between the date of the financial statements and the date of the
       auditor's report

Checkbox Auditor's responsibilities regarding subsequent events

   Perform audit procedures designed to obtain sufficient

   appropriate audit evidence that all events occurring between the

   date of the financial statements and the date of the auditor's

   report that require adjustment of, or disclosure in, the financial

   statements have been identified.

   If such subsequent events that require adjustment of, or

   disclosure in, the financial statements have been identified, it shall

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          COMPLETION AND REVIEW                    7.11  a

          be determined whether each such event is appropriately reflected
          in those financial statements.

          Obtain a written representation from management or those

          charged with governance that all events occurring subsequent to

          the date of the financial statements and for which the applicable

          financial reporting framework requires adjustment or disclosure

          have been adjusted or disclosed.

(B) Overview of auditor's responsibilities after the date of the auditor's
       report but before the date the financial statements are issued

Checkbox  Auditor's responsibilities after the date of the auditor's
          report but before the date the financial statements are issued

          No obligation for auditor to perform any audit procedures
          regarding the financial statements after the date of the auditor's
          report. However, when, after the date of the auditor's report but
          before the date the financial statements are issued, a fact
          becomes known to the auditor that, had it been known to the
          auditor at the date of the auditor's report, may have caused the
          auditor to amend the auditor's report, determine if financial
          statements need amendment.

          If management amends financial statements, carry out audit
          procedures on amendment and extend the procedures to date of
          new audit report and provide new auditor's report on amended
          financial statements.

          When management does not amend the financial statements in
          circumstances where the auditor believes they need to be
          amended and auditor's report has not been provided to the
          entity, the auditor shall modify the opinion as required by SA 705
          and then provide the auditor's report.

          If the auditor's report has already been provided to the entity, the
          auditor shall notify management not to issue the financial
          statements to third parties before the necessary amendments
          have been made. If the financial statements are nevertheless
          subsequently issued without the necessary amendments, the
          auditor shall take appropriate action, to seek to prevent reliance
          on the auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.12   AUDITING AND ETHICS

(C) Overview of auditor's responsibilities after the financial statements have
       been issued

Checkbox  Auditor's responsibilities after the financial statements have
          been issued

          No obligation to perform any audit procedures regarding
          financial statements after the financial statements have been
          issued. However, after financial statements have been issued, a
          fact becomes known to the auditor that, had it been known to
          the auditor at the date of the auditor's report, may have caused
          the auditor to amend the auditor's report, determine if financial
          statements need amendment.

          If the management amends the financial statements, the auditor
          shall carry out the audit procedures necessary in the
          circumstances on the amendment.

          Review the steps taken by management to ensure that anyone in
          receipt of the previously issued financial statements together
          with the auditor's report thereon is informed of the situation.
          Extend the audit procedures, already referred, to the date of the
          new auditor's report and provide a new auditor's report on the
          amended financial statements.

          Include in the new auditor's report an Emphasis of Matter
          paragraph or Other Matter(s) paragraph referring to a note to the
          financial statements that more extensively discusses the reason
          for the amendment of the previously issued financial statements
          and to the earlier report provided by the auditor.

          If management does not take the necessary steps to ensure that
          anyone in receipt of the previously issued financial statements is
          informed of the situation and does not amend the financial
          statements in circumstances where the auditor believes they
          need to be amended, the auditor shall notify management that
          the auditor will seek to prevent future reliance on the auditor's
          report.
          If, despite such notification, management or those charged with
          governance do not take these necessary steps, the auditor shall
          take appropriate action to seek to prevent reliance on the
          auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.13  a

Test Your Understanding 1

CA PK Jacob is conducting audit of a company for year 2021-22. The company is
engaged in export of ethnic rugs to buyers in Europe. The audit is nearing
completion in month of July 2022. However, it becomes known to the auditor that
one of overseas buyers has made a legal claim against the company on 1st June
2022 for injury caused to a customer of one European buyer due to sub-standard
dyes used in rugs of one lot of order shipped in August, 2021. The management
of company has decided to agree to an out of court settlement of Rs.5 crore to
protect its reputation. The financial statements of the company are silent on this
issue.

Discuss, how, CA PK Jacob should proceed to deal with above issue.

Test Your Understanding 2

CA Chandni Khanna is going to complete audit of a company within next few days.
She has performed necessary audit procedures like inquiry of management
personnel, reading minutes of meetings held after date of financial statements,
going through books of accounts after date of financial statements to make sure
that all subsequent events before signing audit report have been considered by
her. Still, she wants to be certain that no such events have been left out. What she
should do in such a situation? Also, discuss the rationale of doing so.

     2. MEANING OF GOING CONCERN AND ITS
          SIGNIFICANCE

Going concern is one of the fundamental accounting assumptions. The enterprise
is normally viewed as a going concern, that is, as continuing in operation for the
foreseeable future. It is assumed that the enterprise has neither the intention nor
the necessity of liquidation or of curtailing materially the scale of the operations.

Under the going concern basis of accounting, the financial statements are prepared
on the assumption that the entity is a going concern and will continue its operations
for the foreseeable future. General purpose financial statements are prepared using
the going concern basis of accounting, unless management either intends to liquidate
the entity or to cease operations, or has no realistic alternative but to do so.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.14  AUDITING AND ETHICS

The significance of Going Concern is due to its effect on preparation of financial
statements. Ability or otherwise of an enterprise to be viewed as going concern
affects its preparation of financial statements.

When the use of the going concern basis of accounting is appropriate, assets and
liabilities are recorded on the basis that the entity will be able to realize its assets
and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business.

When an enterprise is not viewed as a going concern, the financial statements are
prepared on liquidation basis. For example, inventories may need to be written
down as these may be sold for a lower price. Assets may have to be recorded at
the likely prices they will fetch.

2.1 SA 570 Going Concern

SA 570 Going Concern deals with the auditor's responsibilities in the audit of
financial statements relating to going concern and the implications for the auditor's
report.

2.2 Responsibility for assessment of the entity's ability to
      continue as a going concern

The preparation of the financial statements requires management to assess the
entity's ability to continue as a going concern even if the financial reporting
framework does not include an explicit requirement to do so. Management's
assessment of the entity's ability to continue as a going concern involves making a
judgment, at a particular point in time, about inherently uncertain future outcomes
of events or conditions. The following factors are relevant to that judgment: -

· The degree of uncertainty associated with the outcome of an event or
       condition increases significantly the further into the future an event or
       condition or the outcome occurs.

· The size and complexity of the entity, the nature and condition of its business
       and the degree to which it is affected by external factors affect the judgment
       regarding the outcome of events or conditions.

· Any judgment about the future is based on information available at the time
       at which the judgment is made. Subsequent events may result in outcomes

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.15  a

       that are inconsistent with judgments that were reasonable at the time they
       were made.

2.3 Responsibilities of the auditor

The auditor's responsibilities are to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence
regarding and conclude on the appropriateness of management's use of the going
concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements and to
conclude, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty
exists about the entity's ability to continue as a going concern. These
responsibilities exist even if the financial reporting framework used in the
preparation of the financial statements does not include an explicit requirement for
management to make a specific assessment of the entity's ability to continue as a
going concern.

However, as described in SA 200, the potential effects of inherent limitations on the
auditor's ability to detect material misstatements are greater for future events or
conditions that may cause an entity to cease to continue as a going concern. The
auditor cannot predict such future events or conditions. Accordingly, the absence
of any reference to a material uncertainty about the entity's ability to continue as
a going concern in an auditor's report cannot be viewed as a guarantee as to the
entity's ability to continue as a going concern.

2.4 Objectives of auditor in accordance with SA 570

The objectives of the auditor are: -

(a) To obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding and conclude on
       the appropriateness of management's use of the going concern basis of
       accounting in the preparation of the financial statements;

(b) To conclude, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material
       uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant
       doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a going concern; and

(c) To report in accordance with this SA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.16  AUDITING AND ETHICS

   OBJECTIVES

     To obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding, and
     conclude on, the appropriateness of management's use of the
     going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the
     financial statements;

     To conclude, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a
     material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may
     cast significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a going
     concern; and

     To report in accordance with this SA.

2.5 Risk assessment procedures and related activities

When performing risk assessment procedures as required by SA 315, the auditor
shall consider whether events or conditions exist that may cast significant doubt on
the entity's ability to continue as a going concern. In so doing, the auditor shall
determine whether management has already performed a preliminary assessment
of the entity's ability to continue as a going concern and: -

(a) If such an assessment has been performed, the auditor shall discuss the
       assessment with management and determine whether management has
       identified events or conditions that, individually or collectively, may cast
       significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a going concern and, if
       so, management's plans to address them or

(b) If such an assessment has not yet been performed, the auditor shall discuss
       with management the basis for the intended use of the going concern basis
       of accounting, and inquire of management whether events or conditions exist
       that, individually or collectively, may cast significant doubt on the entity's
       ability to continue as a going concern.

The auditor shall remain alert throughout the audit for audit evidence of events or
conditions that may cast significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a
going concern.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.17  a

Examples of events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the
entity's ability to continue as a going concern
The following are examples of events or conditions that, individually or collectively,
may cast significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a going concern
Financial events or conditions
· Net liability or net current liability position
· Fixed-term borrowings approaching maturity without realistic prospects of

       renewal or repayment; or excessive reliance on short-term borrowings to
       finance long-term assets
· Indications of withdrawal of financial support by creditors
· Negative operating cash flows indicated by historical or prospective financial
       statements
· Adverse key financial ratios
· Substantial operating losses or significant deterioration in the value of assets
       used to generate cash flows
· Arrears or discontinuance of dividends
· Inability to pay creditors on due dates
· Inability to comply with the terms of loan agreements
· Change from credit to cash-on-delivery transactions with suppliers
· Inability to obtain financing for essential new product development or other
       essential investments
Operating events or conditions
· Management intentions to liquidate the entity or to cease operations
· Loss of key management without replacement
· Loss of a major market, key customer(s), franchise, license, or principal
       supplier(s)
· Labour difficulties
· Shortages of important supplies

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.18  AUDITING AND ETHICS

· Emergence of a highly successful competitor

Other events or conditions

· Non-compliance with capital or other statutory or regulatory requirements,
       such as solvency or liquidity requirements for financial institutions

· Pending legal or regulatory proceedings against the entity that may, if
       successful, result in claims that the entity is unlikely to be able to satisfy

· Changes in law or regulation or government policy expected to adversely
       affect the entity

· Uninsured or underinsured catastrophes when they occur

2.6 Evaluating management's assessment

The auditor shall evaluate management's assessment of the entity's ability to
continue as a going concern. Management's assessment of the entity's ability to
continue as a going concern is a key part of the auditor's consideration of
management's use of the going concern basis of accounting.

It is not the auditor's responsibility to rectify the lack of analysis by management.
In some circumstances, however, the lack of detailed analysis by management to
support its assessment may not prevent the auditor from concluding whether
management's use of the going concern basis of accounting is appropriate in the
circumstances.

For example, when there is a history of profitable operations and a ready access to
financial resources, management may make its assessment without detailed
analysis. In this case, the auditor's evaluation of the appropriateness of
management's assessment may be made without performing detailed evaluation
procedures if the auditor's other audit procedures are sufficient to enable the
auditor to conclude whether management's use of the going concern basis of
accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is appropriate in the
circumstances.

In other circumstances, evaluating management's assessment of the entity's ability
to continue as a going concern, may include an evaluation of the process
management followed to make its assessment, the assumptions on which the
assessment is based and management's plans for future action and whether
management's plans are feasible in the circumstances.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.19  a

In evaluating management's assessment of the entity's ability to continue as a
going concern, the auditor shall cover the same period as that used by
management to make its assessment as required by the applicable financial
reporting framework, or by law or regulation if it specifies a longer period. If
management's assessment of the entity's ability to continue as a going concern
covers less than twelve months from the date of the financial statements, the
auditor shall request management to extend its assessment period to at least
twelve months from that date.

2.7 Additional audit procedures when events or conditions
       are identified

If events or conditions have been identified that may cast significant doubt on the
entity's ability to continue as a going concern, the auditor shall obtain sufficient
appropriate audit evidence to determine whether or not a material uncertainty
exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the entity's
ability to continue as a going concern through performing additional audit
procedures, including consideration of mitigating factors. These procedures shall
include: -

(a) Where management has not yet performed an assessment of the entity's
       ability to continue as a going concern, requesting management to make its
       assessment.

(b) Evaluating management's plans for future actions in relation to its going
       concern assessment, whether the outcome of these plans is likely to improve
       the situation and whether management's plans are feasible in the
       circumstances.

(c) Where the entity has prepared a cash flow forecast, and analysis of the
       forecast is a significant factor in considering the future outcome of events or
       conditions in the evaluation of management's plans for future actions:

       (i) Evaluating the reliability of the underlying data generated to prepare
               the forecast; and

       (ii) Determining whether there is adequate support for the assumptions
               underlying the forecast.

(d) Considering whether any additional facts or information have become
       available since the date on which management made its assessment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.20  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(e) Requesting written representations from management and, where
       appropriate, those charged with governance, regarding their plans for future
       actions and the feasibility of these plans.

Examples of audit procedures when events or conditions have been identified
that may cast significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue as going
concern

· Analysing and discussing cash flow, profit and other relevant forecasts with

       management

· Analysing and discussing the entity's latest available interim financial
       statements

· Reading the terms of debentures and loan agreements and determining
       whether any have been breached

· Reading minutes of the meetings of shareholders, those charged with
       governance and relevant committees for reference to financing difficulties

· Inquiring of the entity's legal counsel regarding the existence of litigation and
       claims and the reasonableness of management's assessments of their
       outcome and the estimate of their financial implications

· Confirming the existence, legality and enforceability of arrangements to
       provide or maintain financial support with related and third parties and
       assessing the financial ability of such parties to provide additional funds

· Evaluating the entity's plans to deal with unfilled customer orders

· Performing audit procedures regarding subsequent events to identify those
       that either mitigate or otherwise affect the entity's ability to continue as a
       going concern

· Confirming the existence, terms and adequacy of borrowing facilities

· Obtaining and reviewing reports of regulatory actions

· Determining the adequacy of support for any planned disposals of assets

2.8 Auditor's conclusions

The auditor shall evaluate whether sufficient appropriate audit evidence has been
obtained regarding, and shall conclude on, the appropriateness of management's
use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial
statements. Based on the audit evidence obtained, the auditor shall conclude

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.21  a

whether, in the auditor's judgment, a material uncertainty exists related to events
or conditions that, individually or collectively, may cast significant doubt on the
entity's ability to continue as a going concern. A material uncertainty exists when
the magnitude of its potential impact and likelihood of occurrence is such that, in
the auditor's judgment, appropriate disclosure of the nature and implications of
the uncertainty is necessary.

2.9 Adequacy of disclosures when events or conditions
       have been identified and a material uncertainty exists

If the auditor concludes that management's use of the going concern basis of
accounting is appropriate in the circumstances but a material uncertainty exists,
the auditor shall determine whether the financial statements: -

(a) Adequately disclose the principal events or conditions that may cast
       significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a going concern and
       management's plans to deal with these events or conditions and

(b) Disclose clearly that there is a material uncertainty related to events or
       conditions that may cast significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue
       as a going concern and, therefore, that it may be unable to realize its assets
       and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business.

2.10 Adequacy of disclosures when events or conditions
       have been identified but no material uncertainty exists

If events or conditions have been identified that may cast significant doubt on the
entity's ability to continue as a going concern but, based on the audit evidence
obtained the auditor concludes that no material uncertainty exists, the auditor shall
evaluate whether, in view of the requirements of the applicable financial reporting
framework, the financial statements provide adequate disclosures about these
events or conditions.

2.11 Implications for the auditor's report

(I) If use of Going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate

       If the financial statements have been prepared using the going concern basis
       of accounting but, in the auditor's judgment, management's use of the going

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.22  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is
       inappropriate, the auditor shall express an adverse opinion.

(II) If use of going concern basis of accounting is appropriate but a material
       uncertainty exists

(A) Adequate Disclosure of a Material Uncertainty is made in the Financial
       Statements

       If adequate disclosure about the material uncertainty is made in the financial
       statements, the auditor shall express an unmodified opinion and the
       auditor's report shall include a separate section under the heading "Material
       Uncertainty Related to Going Concern" to: -

       (a) Draw attention to the note in the financial statements that discloses
               such matters.

       (b) State that these events or conditions indicate that a material uncertainty
               exists that may cast significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue
               as a going concern and that the auditor's opinion is not modified in
               respect of the matter.

(B) Adequate Disclosure of a Material Uncertainty is Not Made in the
       Financial Statements

       If adequate disclosure about the material uncertainty is not made in the
       financial statements, the auditor shall:

       (a) Express a qualified opinion or adverse opinion, as appropriate, in
               accordance with SA 705.

       (b) In the Basis for Qualified (Adverse) Opinion section of the auditor's
               report, state that a material uncertainty exists that may cast significant
               doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a going concern and that
               the financial statements do not adequately disclose this matter.

(III) Management unwilling to make or extend its assessment

       If management is unwilling to make or extend its assessment when requested
       to do so by the auditor, the auditor shall consider the implications for the
       auditor's report. In such a situation, a qualified opinion or a disclaimer of
       opinion in the auditor's report may be appropriate, because it may not be
       possible for the auditor to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  COMPLETION AND REVIEW                                7.23     a

regarding management's use of the going concern basis of accounting in the
preparation of the financial statements.

Overview of auditor's responsibilities regarding Going Concern

Checkbox Auditor's responsibilities regarding going concern

  Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the

  appropriateness of management's use of the going concern basis

  of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements.

  Conclude, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a

  material uncertainty exists about the entity's ability to continue as

  a going concern.

  Report in accordance with SA 570.

Test Your Understanding 3

During course of audit of a company, CA. Varun Aggarwal notices that company is
facing significant skilled labour shortages resulting in hampering of operations of
company. The company's manufacturing is dependent upon skilled labour coming
from villages in certain districts of Eastern UP. However, due to job opportunities
available near villages now, many are not interested in going out from their native
villages.

Such a situation has led to company not being able to keep its commitments, losing
out on orders and fall in its revenues. Fixed costs of the company remain at a high
level. As a result, company is facing a liquidity crunch and is not able to pay its
creditors on time. The bankers of company are also not willing to help the company
to tide over liquidity crisis. The auditor is having doubts over going concern status
of the company.

How should management of the company try to address auditor's concerns? What
audit procedures may be performed by auditor in such a situation?

3. EVALUATION                                      OF  MISSTATEMENTS

  IDENTIFIED DURING THE AUDIT

Before forming an opinion on the financial statements, the auditor evaluates effects
of identified misstatements on the audit and of uncorrected misstatements on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.24  AUDITING AND ETHICS

financial statements after consideration of materiality. Uncorrected misstatements
refer to those misstatements that the auditor has accumulated during the audit and
that have not been corrected.

3.1 SA 450 Evaluation of Misstatements Identified during
       the Audit

SA 450 deals with the auditor's responsibility to evaluate the effect of identified
misstatements on the audit and of uncorrected misstatements, if any, on the
financial statements.

3.2 Objectives of auditor in accordance with SA 450

The objective of the auditor is to evaluate: -

(a) The effect of identified misstatements on the audit and

(b) The effect of uncorrected misstatements, if any, on the financial statements.

3.3 Accumulation of misstatements identified during the
      audit

The auditor shall accumulate misstatements identified during the audit, other than
those that are clearly trivial. A misstatement may arise from a variety of factors. For
example, an inaccuracy in gathering or processing data from which financial
statements are prepared or an omission of an amount or disclosure can result into
a misstatement.

An entity has wrongly capitalized machinery repair expenses amounting to Rs.5 lacs
resulting in overstatement of profits. It is an example of misstatement.

3.4 Consideration of identified misstatements as the audit
      progresses

The auditor shall determine whether the overall audit strategy and audit plan
need to be revised if: -

(a) The nature of identified misstatements and the circumstances of their
       occurrence indicate that other misstatements may exist that, when
       aggregated with misstatements accumulated during the audit, could be
       material or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.25  a

(b) The aggregate of misstatements accumulated during the audit approaches
       materiality determined in accordance with SA 320.

The auditor may request management to examine a class of transactions, account
balance or disclosure in order for management to understand the cause of a
misstatement identified by the auditor, perform procedures to determine the
amount of the actual misstatement in the class of transactions, account balance or
disclosure, and to make appropriate adjustments to the financial statements. Such
a request may be made, for example, based on the auditor's projection of
misstatements.

If, at the auditor's request, management has examined a class of transactions,
account balance or disclosure and corrected misstatements that were detected, the
auditor shall perform additional audit procedures to determine whether
misstatements remain.

3.5 Communication and correction of misstatements

The auditor shall communicate on a timely basis all misstatements accumulated
during the audit with the appropriate level of management, unless prohibited by
law or regulation. The auditor shall request management to correct those
misstatements. Timely communication of misstatements to the appropriate level of
management is important as it enables management to evaluate whether the items
are misstatements, inform the auditor if it disagrees and take action as necessary.

The correction by management of all misstatements, including those
communicated by the auditor, enables management to maintain accurate
accounting books and records and reduces the risks of material misstatement of
future financial statements because of the cumulative effect of immaterial
uncorrected misstatements related to prior periods.

If management refuses to correct some or all of the misstatements communicated
by the auditor, the auditor shall obtain an understanding of management's reasons
for not making the corrections and shall take that understanding into account when
evaluating whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material
misstatement.

3.6 Evaluating the effect of uncorrected misstatements

Prior to evaluating the effect of uncorrected misstatements, the auditor shall

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.26  AUDITING AND ETHICS

reassess materiality determined in accordance with SA 320 to confirm whether it
remains appropriate in the context of the entity's actual financial results.

The auditor shall determine whether uncorrected misstatements are material,
individually or in aggregate. In making this determination, the auditor shall
consider: -

(a) The size and nature of the misstatements, both in relation to particular classes
       of transactions, account balances or disclosures and the financial statements
       as a whole, and the particular circumstances of their occurrence and

(b) The effect of uncorrected misstatements related to prior periods on the
       relevant classes of transactions, account balances or disclosures, and the
       financial statements as a whole.

3.7 Communication with those charged with governance

The auditor shall communicate with those charged with governance regarding
uncorrected misstatements and the effect that they, individually or in aggregate,
may have on the opinion in the auditor's report, unless prohibited by law or
regulation. The auditor's communication shall identify material uncorrected
misstatements individually. The auditor shall request that uncorrected
misstatements be corrected.

The auditor shall also communicate with those charged with governance the effect
of uncorrected misstatements related to prior periods on the relevant classes of
transactions, account balances or disclosures, and the financial statements as a
whole.

3.8 Written Representation from management regarding
      effects of uncorrected statements

The auditor shall request a written representation from management and, where
appropriate, those charged with governance whether they believe the effects of
uncorrected misstatements are immaterial, individually and in aggregate, to the
financial statements as a whole. A summary of such items shall be included in or
attached to the written representation.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.27  a

3.9 Documentation regarding misstatements identified
      during audit

The audit documentation shall include: -

(a) The amount below which misstatements would be regarded as clearly trivial;

(b) All misstatements accumulated during the audit and whether they have been
       corrected; and

(c) The auditor's conclusion as to whether uncorrected misstatements are
       material, individually or in aggregate, and the basis for that conclusion.

Overview of auditor's responsibilities regarding evaluation of misstatements
identified during the audit

Checkbox Auditor's responsibilities regarding evaluation of misstatements
                 identified during the audit

  Accumulate misstatements identified during the audit other than

  those that are clearly trivial.

  Consider if the above process indicates that other misstatements

  may exist that, when aggregated with misstatements accumulated

  during the audit, could be material or the aggregate of

  misstatements accumulated during the audit approaches materiality

  determined in accordance with SA 320.

  If so, consider if revision is necessary in audit strategy and plan.

  Communicate on a timely basis all misstatements accumulated

  during the audit with the appropriate level of management and

  request for correction of all misstatements.

  Upon management refusal to correct some or all of the

  misstatements communicated, obtain an understanding of

  management's reasons for not making the corrections and consider

  the same at time of evaluating whether the financial statements as a

  whole are free from material misstatement.

  In case of failure of management to correct all of the misstatements,

  reassess materiality to confirm whether it remains appropriate in the

  context of the entity's actual financial results.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.28          AUDITING AND ETHICS

   Determine whether uncorrected misstatements are material,

   individually or in aggregate.

   Communicate with those charged with governance regarding

   uncorrected misstatements and the effect that they, individually or

   in aggregate, may have on the opinion in the auditor's report.

   Request written representation from management that they believe

   that effects of uncorrected statements are immaterial.

   Maintain documentation.

Test Your Understanding 4

You are nearing completion of audit of a company. On going through your working
papers, it is noticed that finished goods inventory was overvalued by Rs. 2 crore. It
has also been noticed that freight of Rs.10 lacs paid on import of machinery was
charged to statement of profit and loss.

Discuss, how you should, proceed and communicate in above situation before
signing audit report.

    4. WRITTEN REPRESENTATIONS

A written representation is a written statement by management provided to the
auditor to confirm certain matters or to support other audit evidence. Written
representations in this context do not include financial statements, the assertions
therein, or supporting books and records.

      written    provided to                       to confirm  to support
   statement by  the auditor                         certain   other audit
   management                                                   evidence
                                                   matters or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.29  a

4.1 Written representations as audit evidence

Audit evidence is all the information used by the auditor in arriving at the
conclusions on which the audit opinion is based. Written representations are
necessary information that the auditor requires in connection with the audit of the
entity's financial statements. Accordingly, similar to responses to inquiries, written
representations are audit evidence.

Written representations are an important source of audit evidence. If management
modifies or does not provide the requested written representations, it may alert
the auditor to the possibility that one or more significant issues may exist. Further,
a request for written, rather than oral, representations in many cases may prompt
management to consider such matters more rigorously, thereby enhancing the
quality of the representations.

Although written representations provide necessary audit evidence, they do not
provide sufficient appropriate audit evidence on their own about any of the
matters with which they deal. Furthermore, the fact that management has provided
reliable written representations does not affect the nature or extent of other audit
evidence that the auditor obtains about the fulfilment of management's
responsibilities, or about specific assertions.

4.2 SA 580- Written Representations

SA 580- Written representations deals with the auditor's responsibility to obtain
written representations from management and, where appropriate, those charged
with governance.

4.3 Objectives of auditor in accordance with SA 580

The objectives of the auditor are: -

(a) To obtain written representations from management and, where appropriate,
       those charged with governance that they believe that they have fulfilled their
       responsibility for the preparation of the financial statements and for the
       completeness of the information provided to the auditor;

(b) To support other audit evidence relevant to the financial statements or
       specific assertions in the financial statements by means of written

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.30  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       representations, if determined necessary by the auditor or required by other
       SAs; and

(c) To respond appropriately to written representations provided by
       management and, where appropriate, those charged with governance, or if
       management or, where appropriate, those charged with governance do not
       provide the written representations requested by the auditor.

                                                   To obtain Written Representations

Objectives of auditor regarding written            To support other evidence
               representation

                                                   To respond appropriately

4.4 From whom Written representations are requested by
      auditor?

The auditor shall request written representations from management with
appropriate responsibilities for the financial statements and knowledge of the
matters concerned. Written representations relate to fulfilment of management's
responsibilities or to support other audit evidence relevant to the financial
statements or one or more specific assertions in the financial statements.

4.5 Written representations                        about  management's
      responsibilities

Written representation about management's responsibilities involves confirmation
of fulfilment of management's responsibilities in following areas: -

(I) Preparation of the financial statements

The auditor shall request management to provide a written representation
that it has fulfilled its responsibility for the preparation of the financial
statements in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework,
including, where relevant, their fair presentation, as set out in the terms of
the audit engagement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.31  a

       Due to its responsibility for the preparation and presentation of the financial
       statements and its responsibilities for the conduct of the entity's business,
       management would be expected to have sufficient knowledge of the process
       followed by the entity in preparing and presenting the financial statements
       and the assertions therein on which to base the written representations.

       In some cases, however, management may decide to make inquiries of others
       who participate in preparing and presenting the financial statements and
       assertions therein, including individuals who have specialized knowledge
       relating to the matters about which written representations are requested.
       Such individuals may include:

       · An actuary responsible for actuarially determined accounting
               measurements.

       · Staff engineers who may have responsibility for and specialized
               knowledge about environmental liability measurements.

       · Internal counsel who may provide information essential to provisions
               for legal claims.

       In some cases, management may include in the written representations
       qualifying language to the effect that representations are made to the best
       of its knowledge and belief. It is reasonable for the auditor to accept such
       wording if the auditor is satisfied that the representations are being made by
       those with appropriate responsibilities and knowledge of the matters
       included in the representations. To reinforce the need for management to
       make informed representations, the auditor may request that management
       include in the written representations, confirmation that it has made such
       inquiries as it considered appropriate to place it in the position to be able to
       make the requested written representations.

(II) Information provided and completeness of transactions

       The auditor shall request management to provide a written
       representation that: -

       (a) It has provided the auditor with all relevant information and access as
               agreed in the terms of the audit engagement and

       (b) All transactions have been recorded and are reflected in the financial
               statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.32  AUDITING AND ETHICS

4.6 Why Written representations about management
      responsibilities are necessary?

Audit evidence obtained during the audit that management has fulfilled its
responsibilities regarding preparation of financial statements and about
information provided and completeness of transactions is not sufficient without
obtaining confirmation from management that it believes that it has fulfilled those
responsibilities. This is because the auditor is not able to judge solely on other audit
evidence whether management has prepared and presented the financial
statements and provided information to the auditor on the basis of the agreed
acknowledgement and understanding of its responsibilities.

For example, the auditor could not conclude that management has provided the
auditor with all relevant information agreed in the terms of the audit engagement
without asking it whether, and receiving confirmation that, such information has
been provided.

The written representations requiring fulfilment of management responsibilities in
relation to above draw on the agreed acknowledgement and understanding of
management of its responsibilities in the terms of the audit engagement by
requesting confirmation that it has fulfilled them. The auditor may also ask
management to reconfirm its acknowledgement and understanding of those
responsibilities in written representations.

This is particularly appropriate when: -

· Those who signed the terms of the audit engagement on behalf of the entity
       no longer have the relevant responsibilities;

· The terms of the audit engagement were prepared in a previous year ;

· There is any indication that management misunderstands those
       responsibilities; or

· Changes in circumstances make it appropriate to do so.

4.7 Description of management's responsibilities in the
      Written representations

Management's responsibilities shall be described in the "Written representations
required about management responsibilities" in the manner in which these
responsibilities are described in the terms of the audit engagement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.33  a

4.8 Other Written representations

Other SAs require the auditor to request written representations. If, in addition to
such required representations, the auditor determines that it is necessary to obtain
one or more written representations to support other audit evidence relevant to
the financial statements or one or more specific assertions in the financial
statements, the auditor shall request such other written representations.

In addition to the written representation about management's responsibilities
regarding preparation of financial statements, the auditor may consider it
necessary to request other written representations about the financial statements.
Such written representations may supplement, but do not form part of, the written
representation relating to management's responsibilities regarding preparation of
financial statements. They may include representations about the following: -

· Whether the selection and application of accounting policies are appropriate;
       and

· Whether matters such as the following, where relevant under the applicable
       financial reporting framework, have been recognized, measured, presented
       or disclosed in accordance with that framework: -

       o Plans or intentions that may affect the carrying value or classification of
               assets and liabilities;

       o Liabilities, both actual and contingent;

       o Title to, or control over, assets, the liens or encumbrances on assets, and
               assets pledged as collateral; and

       o Aspects of laws, regulations and contractual agreements that may affect
               the financial statements, including non-compliance.

4.9 Additional Written representations about information
      provided to the auditor

In addition to the written representation required by auditor regarding
management responsibility about information provided to auditor, the auditor may
consider it necessary to request management to provide a written representation
that it has communicated to the auditor all deficiencies in internal control of which
management is aware.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.34  AUDITING AND ETHICS

4.10 Written representations about specific assertions

When obtaining evidence about, or evaluating, judgments and intentions, the
auditor may consider one or more of the following:

· The entity's past history in carrying out its stated intentions.

· The entity's reasons for choosing a particular course of action.

· The entity's ability to pursue a specific course of action.

· The existence or lack of any other information that might have been obtained
       during the course of the audit that may be inconsistent with management's
       judgment or intent.

In addition, the auditor may consider it necessary to request management to
provide written representations about specific assertions in the financial
statements, in particular, to support an understanding that the auditor has obtained
from other audit evidence of management's judgment or intent in relation to, or
the completeness of, a specific assertion.

For example, if the intent of management is important to the valuation basis for
investments, it may not be possible to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence
without a written representation from management about its intentions. Although
such written representations provide necessary audit evidence, they do not provide
sufficient appropriate audit evidence on their own for that assertion.

4.11 Date of and Period(s) covered by Written
       Representations

The date of the written representations shall be as near as practicable to, but not
after, the date of the auditor's report on the financial statements. The written
representations shall be for all financial statements and period(s) referred to in the
auditor's report.

Because written representations are necessary audit evidence, the auditor's opinion
cannot be expressed, and the auditor's report cannot be dated, before the date of
the written representations. Furthermore, because the auditor is concerned with
events occurring up to the date of the auditor's report that may require adjustment
to or disclosure in the financial statements, the written representations are dated
as near as practicable to, but not after, the date of the auditor's report on the
financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                   COMPLETION AND REVIEW           7.35  a

The written representations are for all periods referred to in the auditor's report
because management needs to reaffirm that the written representations it
previously made with respect to the prior periods remain appropriate.

Situations may arise where current management were not present during all
periods referred to in the auditor's report. Such persons may assert that they are
not in a position to provide some or all of the written representations because they
were not in place during the period. This fact, however, does not diminish such
persons' responsibilities for the financial statements as a whole. Accordingly, the
requirement for the auditor to request from them written representations that
cover the whole of the relevant period(s) still applies.

4.12 Form of Written representations

The written representations shall be in the form of a representation letter addressed
to the auditor. If law or regulation requires management to make written public
statements about its responsibilities, and the auditor determines that such
statements provide some or all of the representations required regarding
management responsibilities, the relevant matters covered by such statements
need not be included in the representation letter.

Illustrative Written representation letter

                                  On the letterhead of the entity

To

PJ Shrimali & Co.                                  15th July, 2022

Chartered Accountants

Dear Sir,

This representation letter is provided in connection with your audit of the financial
statements of XXXX Limited for the year ended March 31, 2022 for the purpose of
expressing an opinion as to whether the financial statements give a true and fair
view in accordance with the applicable accounting standards in India.

We confirm that (to the best of our knowledge and belief, having made such
inquiries as we considered necessary for the purpose of appropriately informing
ourselves):

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.36  AUDITING AND ETHICS

Financial Statements

· We have fulfilled our responsibilities, as set out in the terms of the audit
       engagement dated 17th August 2021, for the preparation of the financial
       statements in accordance with financial reporting Standards, in particular, the
       financial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with the
       applicable accounting standards in India.

· Significant assumptions used by us in making accounting estimates, including
       those measured at fair value, are reasonable.

· Related party relationships and transactions have been appropriately
       accounted for and disclosed in accordance with the requirements of
       applicable accounting standards in India. (SA 550)

· All events subsequent to the date of the financial statements and for which
       applicable accounting standards in India require adjustment or disclosure
       have been adjusted or disclosed. (SA 560)

· The effects of uncorrected misstatements are immaterial, both individually
       and in the aggregate, to the financial statements as a whole. A list of the
       uncorrected misstatements is attached to the representation letter. (SA 450)

Information provided

· We have provided you with: -

       Access to all information of which we are aware that is relevant to the
       preparation of the financial statements such as records, documentation and
       other matters;

       Additional information that you have requested from us for the purpose of
       the audit; and

       Unrestricted access to persons within the entity from whom you determined
       it necessary to obtain audit evidence.

· All transactions have been recorded in the accounting records and are
       reflected in the financial statements.

· We have disclosed to you the results of our assessment of the risk that the
       financial statements may be materially misstated as a result of fraud.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.37  a

· We have disclosed to you all information in relation to fraud or suspected
       fraud that we are aware of and that affects the entity and involves: -

       - Management;

       - Employees who have significant roles in internal control; or

       - Others where the fraud could have a material effect on the financial
       statements.

· We have disclosed to you all information in relation to allegations of fraud,
       or suspected fraud, affecting the entity's financial statements communicated
       by employees, former employees, analysts, regulators or others.

· We have disclosed to you all known instances of non-compliance or
       suspected non-compliance with laws and regulations whose effects should
       be considered when preparing financial statements.

· We have disclosed to you the identity of the entity's related parties and all the
       related party relationships and transactions of which we are aware. (SA 550)

Chief Financial Officer

4.13 Doubt as to the reliability of Written representations

If the auditor has concerns about the competence, integrity, ethical values or
diligence of management, or about its commitment to or enforcement of these, the
auditor shall determine the effect that such concerns may have on the reliability of
representations and audit evidence in general.

In particular, if written representations are inconsistent with other audit evidence,
the auditor shall perform audit procedures to attempt to resolve the matter. If the
matter remains unresolved, the auditor shall reconsider the assessment of the
competence, integrity, ethical values or diligence of management, or of its
commitment to or enforcement of these, and shall determine the effect that this
may have on the reliability of representations and audit evidence in general.

If the auditor concludes that the written representations are not reliable, the auditor
shall take appropriate actions, including determining the possible effect on the
opinion in the auditor's report in accordance with SA 705, having regard to the
requirement of disclaimer of opinion.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.38  AUDITING AND ETHICS

4.14 Requested Written representations not provided

If management does not provide one or more of the requested written
representations, the auditor shall: -

(a) Discuss the matter with management;

(b) Re-evaluate the integrity of management and evaluate the effect that this
       may have on the reliability of representations and audit evidence in general;
       and

(c) Take appropriate actions, including determining the possible effect on the
       opinion in the auditor's report in accordance with SA 705 having regard to
       the requirement of disclaimer of opinion.

4.15 Disclaimer of opinion in case of non-reliability of
       Written Representations about management's
       responsibilities or failure to provide such Written
       Representations

The auditor shall disclaim an opinion on the financial statements in
accordance with SA 705 if:

(a) The auditor concludes that there is sufficient doubt about the integrity of
       management such that the written representations about management
       fulfilling its responsibilities regarding preparation of financial statements and
       about information provided and completeness of transactions are not
       reliable; or

(b) Management does not provide the written representations relating to
       fulfilling its responsibilities regarding preparation of financial statements and
       about information provided and completeness of transactions.

Overview of auditor's responsibilities regarding Written representations

Checkbox Auditor's responsibilities regarding Written representations

   Obtain Written representations from management and, where

   appropriate, those charged with governance that they believe that

   they have fulfilled their responsibility for the preparation of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  COMPLETION AND REVIEW                  7.39         a

  financial statements and for the completeness of the information
  provided to the auditor.

  Obtain Written representations to support other audit evidence

  relevant to the financial statements or specific assertions in the

  financial statements, if determined necessary by the auditor or

  required by other SAs.

  Respond appropriately to written representations provided by

  management and, where appropriate, those charged with

  governance, or if the written representations requested by the

  auditor are not provided, then discuss the matter with

  management, re-evaluate the integrity of the management and

  evaluate effect on auditor's opinion.

  Disclaim opinion on financial statements in accordance with SA 705

  in case of non-reliability of Written representations about

  management responsibilities or non-providing of Written

  representations about management responsibilities.

Test Your Understanding 5

CA R Gurumurthy is about to complete audit of a company. Before completion, he
asks management to provide him a written representation confirming that
management has fulfilled its responsibilities regarding preparation of financial
statements. He also wants management to confirm in writing about providing of all
the necessary information and completeness of transactions to him. The
management feels that auditor is seeking irrelevant documents near the
completion of audit. Why view of management is not proper? What possible
implications it may lead to?

    5. SIGNIFICANCE OF COMMUNICATION WITH
          THOSE CHARGED WITH GOVERNANCE

Communication from auditor is important with those charged with
governance. An effective two-way communication is important in assisting: -
(a) The auditor and those charged with governance in understanding matters

       related to the audit in context, and in developing a constructive working

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.40  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       relationship. This relationship is developed while maintaining the auditor's
       independence and objectivity.

(b) The auditor in obtaining from those charged with governance information
       relevant to the audit. For example, those charged with governance may assist
       the auditor in understanding the entity and its environment, in identifying
       appropriate sources of audit evidence, and in providing information about
       specific transactions or events; and

(c) Those charged with governance in fulfilling their responsibility to oversee the
       financial reporting process, thereby reducing the risks of material
       misstatement of the financial statements.

5.1 Who are "Those charged with governance"?

The person(s) or organization(s) (e.g., a corporate trustee) with responsibility for
overseeing the strategic direction of the entity and obligations related to the
accountability of the entity. This includes overseeing the financial reporting
process. For some entities, those charged with governance may include
management personnel, for example, executive members of a governance board of
a private or public sector entity, or an owner-manager.

Governance structures vary by entities, reflecting influences such as different
cultural and legal backgrounds, and size and ownership characteristics. For
example, in some entities, a supervisory board exists that is separate from executive
board. In other entities, both supervisory and executive functions are performed by
a single board. In some entities, those charged with governance hold positions that
are an integral part of the entity's legal structure. For example, company directors.
In some cases, some or all of those charged with governance are involved in
managing the entity. In others, those charged with governance and management
comprise different persons.

In most entities, governance is the collective responsibility of a governing body,
such as a board of directors, a supervisory board, partners, proprietors, a committee
of management, trustees, or equivalent persons. In some smaller entities, however,
one person may be charged with governance, for example, the owner-manager
where there are no other owners, or a sole trustee.

Such diversity means that it is not possible to specify for all audits the persons with
whom the auditor is to communicate particular matters. Also, in some cases, the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.41  a

appropriate persons with whom to communicate may not be clearly identifiable
from the applicable legal framework or other engagement circumstances, for
example, entities where the governance structure is not formally defined, such as
some family-owned entities and some not-for-profit organizations.

In such cases, the auditor may need to discuss and agree with the engaging party
the relevant persons with whom to communicate. In deciding with whom to
communicate, the auditor's understanding of an entity's governance structure and
processes obtained in accordance with SA 315 is relevant. The appropriate persons
with whom to communicate may vary depending on the matter to be
communicated.

5.2 Scope of SA 260- Communication with Those Charged
      with Governance

SA 260 deals with the auditor's responsibility to communicate with those charged
with governance in an audit of financial statements.

5.3 Objectives of auditor in accordance with SA 260

The objectives of the auditor are: -

(a) To communicate clearly with those charged with governance the
       responsibilities of the auditor in relation to the financial statement audit, and
       an overview of the planned scope and timing of the audit;

(b) To obtain from those charged with governance information relevant to the
       audit;

(c) To provide those charged with governance with timely observations arising
       from the audit that are significant and relevant to their responsibility to
       oversee the financial reporting process and

(d) To promote effective two-way communication between the auditor and those
       charged with governance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.42                       AUDITING AND ETHICS

                              To communicate clearly with those charged with
                              governance the responsibilities of the auditor in
                              relation to the financial statement audit, and an
                              overview of the planned scope and timing of the audit;

Objectives of auditor as per  To obtain from those charged with governance
             SA 260           information relevant to the audit;

                              To provide those charged with governance with timely
                              observations arising from the audit that are significant
                              and relevant to their responsibility to oversee the
                              financial reporting process and

                              To promote effective two-way communication
                              between the auditor and those charged with
                              governance.

5.4 Determining appropriate persons with whom to
      communicate

The auditor shall determine the appropriate person(s) within the entity's
governance structure with whom to communicate.

5.5 Matters to be communicated by auditor

Following matters are required to be communicated by auditor with those
charged with governance: -
(a) The auditor's responsibilities in relation to the financial statement audit

       The auditor shall communicate with those charged with governance the
       responsibilities of the auditor in relation to the financial statement audit,
       including that:
       (a) The auditor is responsible for forming and expressing an opinion on the

               financial statements that have been prepared by management with the
               oversight of those charged with governance and
       (b) The audit of the financial statements does not relieve management or
               those charged with governance of their responsibilities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.43  a

(b) Planned scope and timing of the audit

       The auditor shall communicate with those charged with governance an
       overview of the planned scope and timing of the audit, which includes
       communicating about the significant risks identified by the auditor.

(c) Significant findings from the audit

       The auditor shall communicate with those charged with governance: -

       (a) The auditor's views about significant qualitative aspects of the entity's
               accounting practices, including accounting policies, accounting
               estimates and financial statement disclosures. When applicable, the
               auditor shall explain to those charged with governance why the auditor
               considers a significant accounting practice, that is acceptable under the
               applicable financial reporting framework, not to be most appropriate to
               the particular circumstances of the entity

       (b) Significant difficulties, if any, encountered during the audit;

       (c) Unless all of those charged with governance are involved in managing
               the entity: -

               (i) Significant matters arising during the audit that were discussed,
                       or subject to correspondence, with management;

               (ii) Written representations the auditor is requesting

       (d) Circumstances that affect the form and content of the auditor's report,
               if any and

       (e) Any other significant matters arising during the audit that, in the
               auditor's professional judgment, are relevant to the oversight of the
               financial reporting process.

5.6 Communication of auditor's independence in case of
      listed entities

In the case of listed entities, the auditor shall communicate with those charged
with governance: -

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a        7.44  AUDITING AND ETHICS

(a) A statement that the engagement team and others in the firm as appropriate,
       the firm and, when applicable, network firms have complied with relevant
       ethical requirements regarding independence and

(b) (i)  All relationships and other matters between the firm, network firms, and
         the entity that, in the auditor's professional judgment, may reasonably
         be thought to bear on independence. This shall include total fees
         charged during the period covered by the financial statements for audit
         and non-audit services provided by the firm and network firms to the
         entity and components controlled by the entity. These fees shall be
         allocated to categories that are appropriate to assist those charged with
         governance in assessing the effect of services on the independence of
         the auditor and

(ii) The related safeguards that have been applied to eliminate identified
       threats to independence or reduce them to an acceptable level.

5.7 The Communication process

The auditor shall communicate with those charged with governance the form,
timing and expected general content of communications.

The auditor shall communicate in writing with those charged with governance
regarding significant findings from the audit if, in the auditor's professional
judgment, oral communication would not be adequate. Written communications
need not include all matters that arose during the course of the audit. The auditor
shall communicate in writing with those charged with governance regarding
auditor independence when required in case of listed entities.

The auditor shall communicate with those charged with governance on a timely
basis.

5.8 Adequacy of the communication process

The auditor shall evaluate whether the two-way communication between the
auditor and those charged with governance has been adequate for the purpose of
the audit. If it has not, the auditor shall evaluate the effect, if any, on the auditor's
assessment of the risks of material misstatement and ability to obtain sufficient
appropriate audit evidence, and shall take appropriate action.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.45  a

5.9 Documentation

Where matters required by SA 260 to be communicated are communicated orally,
the auditor shall include them in the audit documentation, and when and to whom
they were communicated. Where matters have been communicated in writing, the
auditor shall retain a copy of the communication as part of the audit
documentation.

Overview of auditor's responsibilities regarding communicating with those
charged with governance

Checkbox Auditor's responsibilities regarding communicating with those
                 charged with governance

  Determine the appropriate person(s) within the entity's governance

  structure with whom to communicate.

  Communicate matters relating to auditor's responsibilities in

  relation to the financial statement audit, planned scope and timing

  of audit and significant findings from the audit.

  In case of listed entities, communicate about auditor's

  independence.

  Retain copy of communication of matters communicated in writing

  as part of audit documentation. In case of matters communicated

  orally, include them in the audit documentation stating when and

  to whom they were communicated.

     6. WHY COMMUNICATION OF SIGNIFICANT
          DEFICIENCIES IN INTERNAL CONTROL IS
          NECESSARY?

Communicating significant deficiencies in internal control in writing to those
charged with governance reflects the importance of these matters and assists those
charged with governance in fulfilling their oversight responsibilities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.46  AUDITING AND ETHICS

6.1 Scope of SA 265- Communicating Deficiencies in Internal
      Control to Those Charged with Governance and
      Management

SA 265 deals with the auditor's responsibility to communicate appropriately to
those charged with governance and management deficiencies in internal control
that the auditor has identified in an audit of financial statements.

The auditor is required to obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to
the audit when identifying and assessing the risks of material misstatement. In
making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control in order to
design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the
purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control. The
auditor may identify deficiencies in internal control not only during this risk
assessment process but also at any other stage of the audit. SA 265 specifies which
identified deficiencies the auditor is required to communicate to those charged
with governance and management.

6.2 Objective of auditor in accordance with SA 265

The objective of the auditor is to communicate appropriately to those charged with
governance and management deficiencies in internal control that the auditor has
identified during the audit and that, in the auditor's professional judgment, are of
sufficient importance to merit their respective attentions.

6.3 Meaning of "Deficiency in internal control" and
      "significant deficiency in internal control"

(a) Deficiency in internal control ­ This exists when: -

       (i) A control is designed, implemented or operated in such a way that it is
               unable to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements in the financial
               statements on a timely basis or

       (ii) A control necessary to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements in
               the financial statements on a timely basis is missing.

(b) Significant deficiency in internal control ­ A deficiency or combination of
       deficiencies in internal control that, in the auditor's professional judgment, is

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW  7.47  a

       of sufficient importance to merit the attention of those charged with
       governance.

       The significance of a deficiency or a combination of deficiencies in internal
       control depends not only on whether a misstatement has actually occurred,
       but also on the likelihood that a misstatement could occur and the potential
       magnitude of the misstatement. Significant deficiencies may, therefore, exist
       even though the auditor has not identified misstatements during the audit.

Examples of matters that the auditor may consider in determining whether a
deficiency or combination of deficiencies in internal control constitutes a
significant deficiency

· The likelihood of the deficiencies leading to material misstatements in the
       financial statements in the future.

· The susceptibility to loss or fraud of the related asset or liability.
· The subjectivity and complexity of determining estimated amounts, such as

       fair value accounting estimates.

· The financial statement amounts exposed to the deficiencies.
· The volume of activity that has occurred or could occur in the account balance

       or class of transactions exposed to the deficiency or deficiencies.

· The importance of the controls to the financial reporting process, for
       example:

        General monitoring controls (such as oversight of management).

        Controls over the prevention and detection of fraud.

        Controls over the selection and application of significant accounting
               policies.

        Controls over significant transactions with related parties.

        Controls over significant transactions outside the entity's normal course
               of business.

        Controls over the period-end financial reporting process (such as
               controls over non-recurring journal entries).

· The cause and frequency of the exceptions detected as a result of the
       deficiencies in the controls.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.48  AUDITING AND ETHICS

· The interaction of the deficiency with other deficiencies in internal control.

Examples of indicators of significant deficiencies in internal control

· Evidence of ineffective aspects of the control environment, such as: -

        Indications that significant transactions in which management is
               financially interested are not being appropriately scrutinised by those
               charged with governance.

        Identification of management fraud, whether or not material, that was
               not prevented by the entity's internal control.

        Management's failure to implement appropriate remedial action on
               significant deficiencies previously communicated.

· Absence of a risk assessment process within the entity where such a process
       would ordinarily be expected to have been established.

· Evidence of an ineffective entity risk assessment process, such as
       management's failure to identify a risk of material misstatement that the
       auditor would expect the entity's risk assessment process to have identified.

· Evidence of an ineffective response to identified significant risks (e.g., absence
       of controls over such a risk).

· Misstatements detected by the auditor's procedures that were not prevented,
       or detected and corrected, by the entity's internal control.

· Disclosure of a material misstatement due to error or fraud as prior period
       items in the current year's Statement of Profit and Loss.

· Evidence of management's inability to oversee the preparation of the financial
       statements.

6.4 Determination of significant deficiencies in internal
      control

The auditor shall determine whether, on the basis of the audit work performed, the
auditor has identified one or more deficiencies in internal control.

If the auditor has identified one or more deficiencies in internal control, the auditor
shall determine, on the basis of the audit work performed, whether, individually or
in combination, they constitute significant deficiencies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.49  a

6.5 Communication of significant deficiencies in internal
      control to those charged with governance

The auditor shall communicate in writing significant deficiencies in internal control
identified during the audit to those charged with governance on a timely basis.

The auditor shall also communicate to management at an appropriate level of
responsibility on a timely basis: -

(a) In writing, significant deficiencies in internal control that the auditor has
       communicated or intends to communicate to those charged with governance,
       unless it would be inappropriate to communicate directly to management in
       the circumstances; and

(b) Other deficiencies in internal control identified during the audit that have not
       been communicated to management by other parties and that, in the
       auditor's professional judgment, are of sufficient importance to merit
       management's attention.

The auditor shall include in the written communication of significant
deficiencies in internal control: -

(a) A description of the deficiencies and an explanation of their potential effects;
       and

(b) Sufficient information to enable those charged with governance and
       management to understand the context of the communication.

In particular, the auditor shall explain that: -

(i) The purpose of the audit was for the auditor to express an opinion on the
       financial statements;

(ii) The audit included consideration of internal control relevant to the
       preparation of the financial statements in order to design audit procedures
       that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of
       expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control; and

(iii) The matters being reported are limited to those deficiencies that the auditor
       has identified during the audit and that the auditor has concluded are of
       sufficient importance to merit being reported to those charged with
       governance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.50           AUDITING AND ETHICS

Overview of auditor's responsibilities regarding communicating deficiencies
in internal control to those charged with governance and management

Checkbox Auditor's responsibilities regarding communicating
                 deficiencies in internal control to those charged with
                 governance and management

   Determine whether, on the basis of the audit work performed, one

   or more deficiencies in internal control have been identified.

   If one or more deficiencies in internal control have been identified,

   determine, on the basis of the audit work performed, whether,

   individually or in combination, they constitute significant

   deficiencies.

   Communication in writing significant deficiencies in internal control

   identified during the audit to those charged with governance on a

   timely basis giving their description, explanation of potential effects

   and sufficient information to those charged with governance and

   management to understand context of communication.

Test Your Understanding 6

On reviewing internal control over inventories as part of statutory audit of a
company, auditor finds that physical verification is not being conducted at regular
intervals as stipulated by the management. The auditor finds it to be significant
deficiency in internal control over inventories.

He points it out to the management in a one-liner as under: -

"Physical verification of inventories is not being conducted at regular intervals as
stipulated by management."

Is above communication by auditor proper? Ignore statutory reporting
requirements, if any in this regard.

CASE STUDY

CA. Gaurav Gogoi is about to conclude audit of a company. It has been noticed
during the course of audit that there is shortage of important raw material supplies
being imported from China due to prevailing geo-political situation. The company
has shared with him its plan to deal with the situation. He is satisfied with
assessment of the company for dealing with the matter. The issue is disclosed in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.51  a

financial statements and considering management's assessment, it is felt that use
of going concern assumption by company in preparation of financial statements is
appropriate.

Besides, he also wants to be sure that all subsequent events till now have been
considered and accounted for, where ever necessary, in financial statements.

Before concluding audit, he requests written representations from management
regarding its responsibilities. However, it is noticed that such written
representations provided by management use qualifying language.

He has also communicated significant findings from audit in writing with those
charged with governance in the company and has retained copy of relevant mails.
Besides, there are certain matters which were communicated by him orally from
time to time during the course of audit to those charged with governance.

Based on above, answer the following questions: -

(1) As regards description of matter above concerning issue of going concern,
       which of the following statements is most appropriate for auditor's report?

       (a) The auditor should express an unmodified opinion.

       (b) The auditor should express a qualified opinion as material uncertainty
               exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on
               the entity's ability to continue as a going concern.

       (c) Besides expressing an unmodified opinion, the auditor's report shall
               include a separate section under the heading "Material Uncertainty
               Related to Going Concern" drawing attention to the note in which such
               disclosure is made in financial statements along with related matters.

       (d) Such an issue does not affect auditor's opinion.

(2) As regards going concern basis of accounting is concerned, which of the
       following statements is true?

       (a) A company showing net loss in its financial statements is essentially not
               a going concern.

       (b) Following going concern assumption of accounting is primary duty of
               auditor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.52  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (c) In case, a company is not a going concern, its financial statements must
               be prepared on liquidation basis.

       (d) Audit procedure seeking confirmation from banker regarding outstanding
               balance relates to verification of going concern assumption.

(3) Which of the following statements is true in respect of auditor's responsibilities
       in respect of subsequent events?

       (a) There is no obligation for an auditor to perform audit procedures for
               events occurring between date of financial statements and date of
               auditor's report.

       (b) There is no obligation for an auditor to perform audit procedures after
               signing of auditor's report, even if he comes to know of an event, which
               if known to him earlier would have caused him to amend the audit report.

       (c) The auditor has only to rely upon written representation of management
               regarding subsequent events. He has no other means to know about such
               events.

       (d) The auditor should perform necessary audit procedures to know about
               events occurring between the date of financial statements and date of
               auditor's report.

(4) As regards use of qualifying language in written representations, which of the
       following statement is most appropriate?

       (a) It is reasonable for the auditor to accept such wording if the auditor is
               satisfied that the representations are being made by those with
               appropriate responsibilities and knowledge of the matters included in the
               representations.

       (b) Written representations should be unconditional. Such a wording is not
               acceptable.

       (c) Such a wording dilutes intent of written representations. However, it can
               be accepted by auditor only in exceptional circumstances.

       (d) Qualifying language in written representations is compulsory.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.53  a

(5) As regards auditor's responsibility regarding matters communicated orally with
       those charged with governance, which of following is most appropriate?

       (a) Matters communicated orally have to be documented by the auditor
               stating when and to whom these were communicated.

       (b) Matters communicated orally need not be put into writing. It is sufficient
               for auditor to have communicated orally.

       (c) Matters communicated orally need not be put into writing. It is not
               practically feasible.

       (d) Matters communicated orally have to be documented by the auditor
               stating to whom these were communicated.

Answers to MCQs involving case study

1. c  2. c  3. d                                   4. a  5. a

SUMMARY

 Events occurring between the date of the financial statements and the date
       of the auditor's report and facts that become known to the auditor after the
       date of the auditor's report are known as subsequent events.

 Such events may be those that provide evidence of conditions that existed at
       the date of the financial statements and those that provide evidence of
       conditions that arose after the date of the financial statements.

 SA 560 deals with the auditor's responsibilities relating to subsequent events
       in an audit of financial statements.

 Going concern is one of the fundamental accounting assumptions. The
       enterprise is normally viewed as a going concern, that is, as continuing in
       operation for the foreseeable future. It is assumed that the enterprise has
       neither the intention nor the necessity of liquidation or of curtailing materially
       the scale of the operations.

 SA 570 Going Concern deals with the auditor's responsibilities in the audit of
       financial statements relating to going concern and the implications for the
       auditor's report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.54  AUDITING AND ETHICS

 Before forming an opinion on the financial statements, the auditor evaluates
       effects of identified misstatements on the audit and of uncorrected
       misstatements on financial statements after consideration of materiality.

 Uncorrected misstatements refer to those misstatements that the auditor has
       accumulated during the audit and that have not been corrected.

 SA 450- Evaluation of misstatements identified during the audit deals with
       the auditor's responsibility to evaluate the effect of identified misstatements
       on the audit and of uncorrected misstatements, if any, on the financial
       statements.

 A written representation is a written statement by management provided to
       the auditor to confirm certain matters or to support other audit evidence.
       Written representations in this context do not include financial statements,
       the assertions therein, or supporting books and records.

 Although written representations provide necessary audit evidence, they do
       not provide sufficient appropriate audit evidence on their own about any of
       the matters with which they deal.

 SA 580 Written representations deals with the auditor's responsibility to
       obtain written representations from management and, where appropriate,
       those charged with governance.

 Communication from auditor is important with those charged with
       governance.

 "Those Charged with Governance" refer to the person(s) or organization(s)
       with responsibility for overseeing the strategic direction of the entity and
       obligations related to the accountability of the entity. This includes
       overseeing the financial reporting process.

 SA 260- Communication with Those Charged with Governance deals with the
       auditor's responsibility to communicate with those charged with governance
       in an audit of financial statements.

 Communicating significant deficiencies in internal control in writing to those
       charged with governance reflects the importance of these matters and assists
       those charged with governance in fulfilling their oversight responsibilities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.55  a

 SA 265 Communicating Deficiencies in Internal Control to Those Charged with
       Governance and Management deals with the auditor's responsibility to
       communicate appropriately to those charged with governance and
       management, deficiencies in internal control that the auditor has identified in
       an audit of financial statements.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQs based Questions

(1) An auditor of a company communicates significant findings from audit with
       those charged with governance in the company. Which of the statements is
       false in regard to communication made?
       (a) Evaluation of adequacy of communication process is required on part of
               the auditor.
       (b) Planned scope and timing of audit has also to be communicated.
       (c) Communication of rationale behind audit procedures is necessary.
       (d) Significant difficulties encountered during audit, if any, have to be
               communicated.

(2) Written representations are: -
       (a) Necessary audit evidence
       (b) Sufficient appropriate audit evidence
       (c) Not audit evidence
       (d) Audit evidence depending upon auditor's professional judgment

(3) Which of the following is false regarding communication of misstatements
       identified during course of an audit?
       (a) The auditor should request those charged with governance for correction
               of identified misstatements.
       (b) The auditor should obtain written representation acknowledging
               management belief that effect of uncorrected misstatements is material.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.56  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       (c) The auditor should obtain written representation acknowledging
               management belief that effect of uncorrected misstatements is
               immaterial.

       (d) The auditor should communicate effect of uncorrected misstatements
               related to prior periods on the relevant classes of transactions, account
               balances or disclosures, and the financial statements as a whole.

(4) Which of the following is not an example of subsequent event?

       (a) Event occurring between date of financial statements and date of
               auditor's report.

       (b) Event occurring on date of financial statements.

       (c) Event occurring after filing audit report with tax authorities. Had such an
               event been known earlier, auditor would have amended report.

       (d) Event occurring during course of performing audit procedures after date
               of financial statements.

(5) Which of the following is not an example of events or conditions that may cast
       significant doubt on the entity's ability to continue as a going concern?

       (a) Adverse key financial ratios

       (b) Inability to invest in modernisation of plant

       (c) Inability to pay creditors on time

       (d) Inability to pay salary of staff

Descriptive Questions

1. List out some matters that the auditor may consider in determining whether a
       deficiency or combination of deficiencies in internal control constitutes a
       "significant deficiency".

2. In what ways an effective two-way communication between auditor and those
       charged with governance is important?

3. The auditor of a company is having concerns about following of going concern
       basis of accounting followed by management for preparation of financial
       statements. It asks the management to justify preparation of financial
       statements. However, management is not willing to make its assessment and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.57  a

       share with auditor. What are implications for auditor's report in such a
       scenario?

4. Discuss documentation requirements for an auditor regarding misstatements
       identified during audit under SA 450.

5. Discuss meaning of "Date the financial statements are issued" under SA 560.

ANSWERS/SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs based Questions

1. (c) 2. (a) 3. (b) 4. (b) 5. (b)

Answers to Questions involving Descriptive Questions

1. Refer to topic on "Examples of some matters that the auditor may consider
       in determining whether a deficiency or combination of deficiencies in internal
       control constitutes a significant deficiency".

2. Refer to topic on "Significance of Communication with Those charged with
       governance."

3. Refer to topic on "Implication for auditor's report" under heading SA 570
       Going Concern

4. Refer to topic on "Documentation regarding misstatements identified during
       audit"

5. Refer to topic on "Meaning of "Date the financial statements are issued"
       under SA 560.

Answers to Questions involving Test Your Understanding

1. In the given case, the auditor has come to know of legal claim against the
       company before issue of audit report. It has also come to his knowledge that
       management of company has agreed to an out of court settlement of Rs.5
       crore. It is an example of subsequent event between the date of the financial
       statements and the date of the auditor's report. It provides evidence of
       conditions that existed at the date of the financial statements and requires
       adjustment in financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.58  AUDITING AND ETHICS

       He should ask company management to make necessary adjustment to the
       financial statements. If adjustment is not made by management, he should
       consider impact on auditor's report.

2. She has already performed necessary audit procedures like inquiry of
       management personnel, reading minutes of meetings after date of financial
       statements and going through books after date of financial statements.

       Now, she should request management and, where appropriate, those charged
       with governance, to provide a written representation in accordance with SA
       580, "Written Representations" that all events occurring subsequent to the
       date of the financial statements and for which the applicable financial
       reporting framework requires adjustment or disclosure have been adjusted
       or disclosed.

       The rationale of obtaining written representations is that even after
       performing abovesaid procedures, she may not come to know all subsequent
       events. Therefore, it is necessary from an auditor's point of view to obtain
       acknowledgment from management in the form of Written representations
       that all such events for which the applicable financial reporting framework
       requires adjustment or disclosure have been adjusted or disclosed.

3 Significant shortage of skilled labour, inability to pay creditors on time and
       overall liquidity crisis faced by the company are examples of events or
       conditions that, individually or collectively, may cast significant doubt on the
       entity's ability to continue as a going concern.

       In such a situation, management should try to address auditor's concerns by
       preparing its future plan of action including preparation of cash flow forecast
       showing inflow and outflow of cash. Such a cash flow forecast should address
       auditor's concerns regarding liquidity crisis being faced by the company.

       The auditor should perform audit procedures to evaluate the reliability of the
       underlying data to prepare the forecast and determining whether there is
       adequate support for the assumptions underlying the forecast. The auditor
       should also consider whether any additional facts or information have
       become available since the date on which management made its assessment.

4. The instances highlighted in above situation are examples of misstatements
       identified during the audit. Over valuation of inventory of finished goods by

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPLETION AND REVIEW                              7.59  a

       Rs. 2 crore and wrongly charging freight of Rs. 10 lacs paid on machinery to
       statement of profit and loss instead of capitalizing are examples of
       misstatements.

       The auditor should communicate above identified misstatements to those
       charged with governance and request for correction of these misstatements.
       In case, these are not corrected, understand the reasons for not making the
       corrections and reassess materiality. It should also be considered whether
       uncorrected statements are material individually or in aggregate. Effect of
       uncorrected misstatements on the opinion in auditor's report should be
       communicated to those charged with governance.

5. The view of management is not proper. Audit evidence obtained during the
       audit that management has fulfilled its responsibilities regarding preparation
       of financial statements and about information provided and completeness of
       transactions is not sufficient without obtaining confirmation from
       management that it believes that it has fulfilled those responsibilities. This is
       because the auditor is not able to judge solely on other audit evidence
       whether management has prepared and presented the financial statements
       and provided information to the auditor on the basis of the agreed
       acknowledgement and understanding of its responsibilities.

       In case of refusal of management to provide such a confirmation, it may lead
       to disclaimer of opinion by the auditor.

6. While pointing out significant deficiencies in internal control, auditor has not
       only to communicate significant deficiencies giving their description but also
       explain the potential effects and sufficient information to those charged with
       governance and management to understand context of communication.

       Therefore, the above communication is not proper. Not only significant
       deficiency has to be communicated, it should also be explained to
       management the potential effects of not carrying out physical verification of
       inventories at regular intervals as stipulated by management. It should
       explain that such a significant deficiency can lead to misstatement of
       inventories impacting profits of the company. Highlighting importance of
       such a control, it should be stated that responsibility be fixed for concerned
       persons for adhering to such an important control.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
