CHAPTER  11

COMPANY ACCOUNTS

UNIT ­ 1 INTRODUCTION TO COMPANY ACCOUNTS

                                         LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to:
 Understand the reason for the existence and survival of a company.
 Learn the nature and types of companies.
 Explain the salient features of a company.
 Understand the purpose of preparing the financial statements of the

       company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.2                ACCOUNTING

11.2

UNIT OVERVIEW

          Subsidiary                               Government     Foreign
          Company                                    Company     company

 Holding                                                                     Private
Company                                                                     Company

Company                                              Tyes of                  Public
 limited                                           Companies                Company
    by

Gurantee

Company                                              Listed                           One
 limited                                           Company                          Person
    by                                                                             Company
  Shares
                                                                   Small
                 Unlimited                                       Company
                  Compnay

                                                   Statement
                                                    of Profit
                                                    and Loss

          Balance                                  Preparation   Cash Flow
           Sheet                                   of Financial  Statement
                                                   Statements

                                                   Notes to
                                                   Accounts

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANY ACCOUNTS                                   11.3

      1.1 INTRODUCTION

The never-ending human desire to grow and grow further has given rise to the expansion of
business activities, which in turn has necessitated the need to increase the scale of operations
so as to provide goods and services to the ever-increasing needs of the growing population
of consumers. Large amount of money, modern technology, large human contribution etc. is
required for it, which is not possible to arrange under partnership or proprietorship. To
overcome this difficulty, the concept of `Company' or `Corporation' came into existence.

While the invention of steam power ignited the human imagination to build big machines for
the mass production of goods, the need to separate the management from ownership gave
birth to a form of organisation today known as `company'.

Company form of organisation is one of the ingenious creations of human mind, which has
enabled the business to carry on its wealth creation activities through optimum utilisation of
resources. In course of time, a company structure has become an important institutional form
for business enterprise, which has carved out a key place for itself in the field of business
operations as well as in the wealth-generating functions of society.

      1.2 MEANING OF COMPANY

The word `Company', in everyday usage, implies an assemblage of persons for social purpose,
companionship or fellowship. As a form of organisation, the word `company' implies a group
of people who voluntarily agree to form a company.

The word `company' is derived from the Latin word `com' i.e. with or together and `panis' i.e.
bread. Originally the word referred to an association of persons or merchant men discussing
matters and taking food together. However, in law `company' is termed as company which is
formed and incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 or an existing company formed and
registered under any of the previous company laws. As per this definition of law, there must
be group of persons who agree to form a company under the law and once so formed; it
becomes a separate legal entity having perpetual succession with a distinct name of its own
and a common seal. Its existence is not affected by the change of members.

Company begs its origin in law. It is an organisation consisting of individuals, called
shareholders by virtue of holding the shares of a company, who are authorised by law to elect
a board of directors and, through it, to act as a separate legal entity as regards its activities.
Generally, the capital of the company consists of transferable shares, and members have
limited liabilities.

To get to the heart of the nature of the company, let us examine the concept of company
propounded under corporate jurisprudence.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    1.4   ACCOUNTING
    11.4

According to Justice Marshal, "A corporation is an artificial being, invisible, intangible and
existing only in the contemplation of law".

In the same manner, Lord Justice Hanay has defined a company as "an artificial person created
by law with a perpetual succession and a common seal".

A common thread running through the various definitions of `company' is that it is an
association of persons created by law as a separate body for a special purpose. At the same
time, definitions have laid down certain characteristics of a corporate organisation, which
make it out as a separate and unique organisation which enables the people to contribute
their wealth to the capital of the company by subscribing to its shares and appointing elected
representatives to carry out the business.

    1.3 SALIENT FEATURES OF A COMPANY

Following are the salient features of a company:

1.  Incorporated Association: A company comes into existence through the operation of

    law. Therefore, incorporation of company under the Companies Act is must. Without

    such registration, no company can come into existence. Being created by law, it is

    regarded as an artificial legal person.

2.  Separate Legal Entity: A company has a separate legal entity and is not affected by

    changes in its membership. Therefore, being a separate business entity, a company can

    contract, sue and be sued in its incorporated name and capacity.

3.  Perpetual Existence: Since company has existence independent of its members, it

    continues to be in existence despite the death, insolvency or change of members.

4.  Common Seal: Company is not a natural person; therefore, it cannot sign the

    documents in the manner as a natural person would do. In order to enable the

    company to sign its documents, it is provided with a legal tool called `Common Seal'.

    The common seal is affixed on all documents by the person authorised to do so who

    in turn puts his signature for and on behalf of the company. Companies Act, 2013

    required common seal to be affixed on certain documents (such as bill of exchange,

    share certificates, etc.) Now, the use of common seal has been made optional. All such

    documents which required affixing the common seal may now instead be signed by

    two directors or one director and a company secretary of the company. Further, every

    company registered in India are required to obtain unique Corporate Identification

    Number (CIN) that is assigned by Registrar of Companies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                COMPANY ACCOUNTS                                      11.5

5.  Limited Liability: The liability of every shareholder of a company is limited to the

    amount he has agreed to pay to the company on the shares allotted to him. If such

    shares are fully paid-up, he is subject to no further liability.

6.  Distinction between Ownership and Management: Since the number of shareholders is

    very large and may be distributed at different geographical locations, it becomes

    difficult for them to carry on the operational management of the company on a day-

    to-day basis. This gives rise to the need of separation of the management and

    ownership.

7.  Not a citizen: A company is not a citizen in the same sense as a natural person is,

    though it is created by the process of law. It has a legal existence but does not enjoy

    the citizenship rights and duties as are enjoyed by the natural citizens.

8.  Transferability of Shares: The capital is contributed by the shareholders through the

    subscription of shares. Such shares are transferable by its members except in case of a

    private limited company, which may have certain restrictions on such transferability.

9.  Maintenance of Books: A limited company is required by law to keep a prescribed set

    of account books and any failure in this regard attracts penalties.

10. Periodic Audit: A company has to get its accounts periodically audited through the
         chartered accountants appointed for the purpose by the shareholders on the
         recommendation of board of directors.

11. Right of Access to Information: The right of the shareholders of a company to inspect
         its books of account, with the exception of books open for inspection under the
         Statute, is governed by the Articles of Association. The shareholders have a right to
         seek information from the directors by participating in the meetings of the company
         and through the periodic reports.

      1.4 TYPES OF COMPANIES

1. Government Company

According to Section 2(45) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Government company" means any
company in which not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid-up share capital is held by the
Central Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the Central
Government and partly by one or more State Governments, and includes a company which is
a subsidiary company of such a Government company.

2. Foreign Company

According to Section 2 (42) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Foreign company" means any
company or body corporate incorporated outside India which ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     1.6                      ACCOUNTING

     11.6

(a) Has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an agent physically or
         through electronic mode; and

(b) Conducts any business activity in India in any other manner.

3. Private Company

Section 2(68) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines `Private company' as a company which by
its articles,

i.   Restrict the right to transfer its shares;

ii.  Except in case of One Person Company limits the number of its members to two

     hundred:

     Provided that where two or more persons hold one or more shares in a company
     jointly, they shall, for the purposes of this sub-clause, be treated as a single member:

     Provided further that--

     (A) Persons who are in the employment of the company; and

     (B) persons who, having been formerly in the employment of the company, were
              members of the company while in that employment and have continued to be
              members after the employment ceased,

     shall not be included in the number of members; and

(iii) Prohibits any invitation to the public to subscribe for any securities of the company.
         Shares of a Private Company are not listed on Stock Exchange.

4. Public Company

Section 2(71) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines Public Company as a company which--

(a) is not a private company; and

(b) has a minimum paid-up share capital as may be prescribed:

Provided that a company which is a subsidiary of a company, not being a private company,
shall be deemed to be public company for the purposes of this Act even where such subsidiary
company continues to be a private company in its articles;

A company which is a listed public company if it gets unlisted continues to be a public
company.

No Minimum Paid-up Share Capital: The minimum paid-up share capital requirement of
INR 1,00,000 (in case of a private company) and INR 5,00,000 (in case of a public company)
has been done away with under Companies Act, 2013. Accordingly, no minimum paid-up

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANY ACCOUNTS                                   11.7

capital requirements will now apply for incorporating private as well as public companies in
India.

5. One Person Company
Section 2 (62) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines "One Person Company" as a company which
has only one person as a member.

6. Small Company
Section 2(85) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines "Small company" means a company, other
than a public company

(i) paid-up share capital of which does not exceed four crores rupees or such higher
         amount as may be prescribed which shall not be more than ten crore rupees; and

(ii) turnover of which as per its last profit and loss account for the immediately preceding
         financial year does not exceed forty crore rupees or such higher amount as may be
         prescribed which shall not be more than hundred crore rupees:

         Provided that nothing in this clause should apply to:

         (A) a holding company or a subsidiary company

         (B) a company registered under section 8

         (C) a company or body corporate governed by any special Act

7. Listed Company
As per Section 2 (52) of the Companies Act, 2013,''listed company" means a company which
has any of its securities listed on any recognised stock exchange.
The company, whose shares are not listed on any recognised stock exchange, is called
``Unlisted Company''.
An unlisted company can be a public company or a private company.

8. Unlimited Company
Section 2 (92) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines ''Unlimited company" means a company
not having any limit on the liability of its members.

9. Company limited by Shares
As per Section 2(22) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Company limited by shares" means a
company having the liability of its members limited by the memorandum to the amount, if
any, unpaid on the shares respectively held by them.

10. Company limited by Guarantee
As per Section 2(21) of the Companies Act, 2013, "company limited by guarantee" means a
company having the liability of its members limited by the memorandum to such amount as

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.8   ACCOUNTING

11.8

the members may respectively undertake to contribute to the assets of the company in the
event of its being wound up.

11. Holding Company

According to Section 2 (46) of the Companies Act, 2103, "Holding company", in relation to
one or more other companies, means a company of which such companies are subsidiary
companies.

12. Subsidiary Company

Section 2(87) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines "subsidiary company" as a company in which
the holding company:

(i) Controls the composition of the Board of Directors; or

(ii) Exercises or controls more than one-half of the total share capital either at its own or
         together
         with one or more of its subsidiary companies.

A company shall be deemed to be a subsidiary company of the holding company even if there
is indirect control through the subsidiary company (ies). The control over the composition of
a subsidiary company's Board of Directors means exercise of some power to appoint or
remove all or a majority of the directors of the subsidiary company.

      1.5 MAINTENANCE OF BOOKS OF ACCOUNT

As per Section 128 of the Companies Act, 2013, every company shall prepare and keep at its
registered office books of account and other relevant books and papers and financial
statement for every financial year which give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs of
the company, including that of its branch office or offices, if any, and explain the transactions
effected both at the registered office and its branches and such books shall be kept on accrual
basis and according to the double entry system of accounting:

Provided further that the company may keep such books of account or other relevant papers
in electronic mode in such manner as may be prescribed.

      1.6 PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

Under Section 129 of the Companies Act, 2013, the financial statements shall give a true and
fair view of the state of affairs of the company or companies, comply with the notified
accounting standards and shall be in the form or forms as may be provided for different class
or classes of companies, as prescribed in Schedule III. The Board of Directors of the company
shall lay financial statements at every annual general meeting of a company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                        COMPANY ACCOUNTS                   11.9

Financial Statements as per Section 2(40) of the Companies Act, 2013, inter-alia include -

i.   A balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;

ii.  A profit and loss account, or in the case of a company carrying on any activity not for

     profit, an income and expenditure account for the financial year;

iii. cash flow statement for the financial year;

iv. A statement of changes in equity, if applicable; and

v.   any explanatory note annexed to, or forming part of, any document referred to in sub-

     clause (i) to sub-clause (iv):

         Provided that the financial statement, with respect to One Person Company, small
         company and dormant company, may not include the cash flow statement.

Requisites of Financial Statements

It shall give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company as at the end of the
financial year.

Provisions Applicable

(1) Specific Act is Applicable

     For instance, any

     (a) Insurance company

     (b) Banking company or

     (c) Any company engaged in generation or supply of electricity* or

     (d) Any other class of company for which a Form of balance sheet or Profit and loss
              account has been prescribed under the Act governing such class of company.

(2) In case of all corporate entities:

     Schedule III to the Companies Act, 2013 deals with the format of the financial
     statements. However, Schedule III contains three divisions either based on the
     applicability of the standards or on the nature of the entity. Each division of Schedule
     III contains parts dealing with formats of financial statements. Part I prescribes the
     format of Balance Sheet while Part II prescribes the format of Statement of Profit and
     Loss.

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             1.10           ACCOUNTING
             11.10

Applicability of Divisions as given under Schedule III has been explained below:

Division            Applicable to:

Division I          Companies that are required to apply Accounting Standards
                    notified under the Companies Act, 2013.

Division II         Companies that are required to apply Indian Accounting
                    Standards notified under the Companies Act, 2013.

Division III        Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) that are required to
                    apply Indian Accounting Standards notified under the
                    Companies Act, 2013.

The paper of accounting at Foundation level incorporates fundamentals of accounting
and accounting of non-corporate entities and corporate entities. At foundation level,
students are expected to understand the format of financial statements of corporate
entities prepared as per Accounting Standards. Therefore, the format of financial
statements as per Division I of Schedule III to the Companies Act, 2013 has been given
below:

                    PART I ­ FORM OF BALANCE SHEET

Name of the Company.........................

Balance Sheet as at...........................

                                                                       (` in............)

Particulars                                        Notes  Figures as   Figures as
                                                    No.    at end of         at
                                                          the current
                                                           reporting   end of the
                                                                        previous
                                                             period    reporting

EQUITY AND LIABILITIES                                                   period

1. Shareholders' funds                                                      xxx
                                                                            xxx
a. Share capital (A)                                      xxx               xxx
                                                                            xxx
b. Reserves and Surplus (B)                               xxx
                                                                            xxx
c. Money received against share warrants                  xxx

2. Share application money pending allotment              xxx

3. Non-current liabilities

a. Long-term borrowings (C)                               xxx

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANY ACCOUNTS                                                     11.11

       b. Deferred tax liabilities (Net)                             xxx    xxx
       c. Other long term liabilities
       d. Long-term provisions (D)                                   xxx    xxx
4. Current liabilities
       a. Short-term borrowings (E)                                  xxx    xxx
       b. Trade Payables
                                                                     xxx    xxx
             (A) total outstanding dues of micro
             enterprises and small enterprises; and                  xxx    xxx
             (B) total outstanding dues of creditors
             other than micro enterprises and small                  xxx    xxx
             enterprises.]
       c. Other current liabilities (F)                              xxx    xxx
       d. Short-term provisions
       Total                                                         xxx    xxx
       ASSETS
       Non-current assets                                            xxx    xxx
1. a. Property, Plant & Equipment and
             Intangible Assets                                       xxx    xxx
             i. Property, Plant and Equipment (G)
             i. Intangible assets (H)                                xxx    xxx
             iii. Capital Work-in-progress
             iv. Intangible assets under development                 xxx    xxx
       b. Non-current investments (I)
       c. Deferred tax assets (Net)                                  xxx    xxx
       d. Long-term loans and advances (J)
       e. Other non-current assets                                   xxx    xxx
2. Current assets
       a. Current investments (K)                                    xxx    xxx
       b. Inventories (L)
       c. Trade receivables                                          xxx    xxx
       d. Cash and cash equivalents (M)
       e. Short-term loans and advances                              xxx    xxx
        f. Other current assets
       Total                                                         xxx    xxx

                                                                     xxx    xxx

                                                                     xxx    xxx

                                                                     xxx    xxx

                                                                     xxx    xxx

                                                                     xxx    xxx

                                                                     xxx    xxx

Certain items are to be explained as follows (list not exhaustive):

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     1.12                      ACCOUNTING
     11.12

A. SHARE CAPITAL
For each class of share capital following points is to be kept in mind:

i.   The number and amount of shares authorised.

ii.  The number of shares which are issued, subscribed and fully paid and which are issued,

     subscribed but not fully paid.

iii. The par value per share.

iv. Shares outstanding at the beginning and at the end of the reporting period should be
         reconciled.

v.   Calls unpaid.

vi. Forfeited shares.
B. RESERVES AND SURPLUS

Reserves and surplus can be distributed among the following sub-heads:

i.   Capital reserves

ii.  Capital redemption reserves

iii. Securities Premium

iv. Debenture Redemption reserve

v.   Revaluation reserve

vi. Surplus; the balance as per profit and loss statement

vii. Other reserves (specify the nature and purpose)

C. LONG TERM BORROWINGS

Long term borrowings can be classified under the following sub-heads:

i.   Bonds/Debentures

ii.  Term loans

iii. Deferred payment liabilities

iv. Deposits

v.   Long term maturities of finance lease obligations

vi. Loans and advances from related parties

vii. Other loans and advances (specify nature)

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                            COMPANY ACCOUNTS                    11.13

D. LONG TERM PROVISIONS

This can be classified as follows:

i.   Employee benefits provision like gratuity, provident fund etc.

ii.  Other provisions (specify the nature)

E. SHORT TERM BORROWINGS

Short term borrowings can be classified among the following sub-heads:

i.   Loans repayable on demand

ii.  Loans and advances from related parties

iii. Deposits

iv. Other loans and advances (specify the nature)

v.   Current maturities of long term borrowings shall be disclosed separately.

F. OTHER CURRENT LIABILITIES

Some of the other current liabilities can be grouped as under:

i.   Current maturities of finance lease obligations

ii.  Interest accrued but not/and due on borrowings

iii. Income received in advance

iv. Unpaid dividends

v.   Application money received for allotment of securities and due for refund and interest

     accrued thereon

vi. Other current liabilities (specify the nature)

G. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT

Property, Plant and Equipment can be classified as follows:

i.   Land

ii.  Buildings

iii. Plant and Equipment

iv. Furniture and Fixtures

v.   Vehicles

vi. Office equipment

vii. Others (specify the nature)

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     1.14                     ACCOUNTING
     11.14

A detailed report showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations
and other adjustments and amount related to depreciation, impairment losses, revaluation
etc. should be provided for each class of asset.

H. INTANGIBLE ASSETS

Intangible assets can be classified as follows:

i.   Goodwill

ii.  Brands/trademarks

iii. Computer software

iv. Mining rights

v.   Mastheads and Publishing titles

vi. Copyrights, patents and other intellectual property rights, services and operating
         rights.

vii. Licence and franchise

viii. Recipes, models, designs, formulae and prototypes

ix. Others (specify the nature)

A detailed report showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations
and other adjustments and amount related to depreciation, impairment losses, revaluation
etc. should be provided for each class of asset.

I.   NON-CURRENT INVESTMENTS

Investments can be classified as under:

i.   Investments in property

ii.  Investments in Equity instruments

iii. Investments in Preference shares

iv. Investments in Governments or trust securities

v.   Investments in debentures or bonds

vi. Investments in Mutual funds

vii. Investments in partnership firms

viii. Other non-current investments (specify the nature)

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                  COMPANY ACCOUNTS     11.15

J.   LONG TERM LOANS AND ADVANCES

It can be classified under the following sub-groups:

i.   Capital advances

ii.  Loans and advances to related parties

iii. Other loans and advances (specify nature)

The above shall also be sub-classified as follows:

i.   Secured, considered good

ii.  Unsecured, considered good

iii. Doubtful
K. CURRENT INVESTMENTS

It can be classified as follows:

i.   Investments in equity instruments

ii.  Investments in preference shares

iii. Investments in Government or trust securities

iv. Investments in bonds or debentures

v.   Investments in Mutual funds

vi. Investments in partnership firms

vii. Other investments (specify the nature)

L. INVENTORIES

Inventories can be classified as:

i.   Raw materials

ii.  Work-in-progress

iii. Stores and spares

iv. Finished goods

v.   Loose tools

vi. Stock in trade

vii. Goods in transit

viii. Others (specify the nature)

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                 1.16         ACCOUNTING
                 11.16

M. CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS

The following head can be classified as follows:

i.   Balances with banks

ii.  Cheques, drafts in hand

iii. Cash in hand

iv. Others (specify the nature)
                        PART II ­ FORM OF STATEMENT OF PROFIT AND LOSS

Name of the Company.........................

Profit and Loss Statement for the year ended ...........................           (` in............)

    Particulars                                        Note   Figures for the       Figures for the
                                                        No.  current reporting          previous

    I. Revenue from operations                                       period        reporting period
                                                                              xxx                  xxx
    II. Other income                                                          xxx                  xxx
                                                                              xxx                  xxx
    III. Total Income (I + II)                                                xxx                  xxx
                                                                              xxx                  xxx
    IV. Expenses:                                                             xxx                  xxx
            Cost of materials consumed                                        xxx                  xxx
            Purchases of Stock-in-Trade
            Changes in inventories of finished                                xxx                  xxx
            goods, Work-in-Progress and                                       xxx                  xxx
            Stock-in-Trade                                                    xxx                  xxx
            Employee benefits expense                                         xxx                  xxx
            Finance costs
            Depreciation and amortization                                     xxx                  xxx
            expense                                                           xxx                  xxx
            Other expenses
                                                                              xxx                  xxx
    Total expenses                                                            xxx                  xxx

    V. Profit before exceptional and                                          xxx                  xxx
            extraordinary items and tax (III-                                 xxx                  xxx
            IV)

    VI. Exceptional items

    VII. Profit before extraordinary items
            and tax (V-VI)

    VIII. Extraordinary Items

    IX. Profit before tax (VII-VIII)

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                            COMPANY ACCOUNTS              11.17

X. Tax expense                                       xxx         xxx

XI. Profit (Loss) for the period from                xxx         xxx
        continuing operations (IX-X)
                                                     xxx         xxx
XII. Profit/(Loss) from discontinuing
        operations                                   xxx         xxx

XIII. Tax expense of discontinuing                   xxx         xxx
        operations
                                                     xxx         xxx
XIV. Profit/(Loss) from discontinuing
        operations (after tax) (XII-XIII)            xxx         xxx

XV. Profit (Loss) for the period (XI +               xxx         xxx
        XIV)

XVI. Earnings per equity share:
        (1) Basic
        (2) Diluted

SUMMARY

1.  `Company' is termed as an entity which is formed and incorporated under the

    Companies Act, 2013 or an existing company formed and registered under any of the

    previous company laws.

2.  Salient features of a company include: Incorporated Association; Separate Legal Entity;

    Perpetual Existence; Common Seal; Limited Liability; Distinction between Ownership

    and Management; Not a citizen; Transferability of Shares; Maintenance of Books;

    Periodic Audit; Right of Access to Information.

3.  Types of companies: Government Company: Foreign Company; Private Company;

    Public Company; One Person Company; Small Company; Listed Company; Unlimited

    Company; Company limited by Shares; Company limited by Guarantee; Holding

    Company; Subsidiary Company.

4.  The financial statements shall give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the

    company or companies, comply with the notified accounting standards and shall be in

    the form or forms as may be provided for different class or classes of companies, as

    prescribed in Schedule III to the Companies Act, 2013. Financial Statements as per

    Section 2(40) of the Companies Act, 2013, include balance sheet as at the end of the

    financial year; profit and loss account, or in the case of a company carrying on any

    activity not for profit, an income and expenditure account for the financial year; cash

    flow statement for the financial year; statement of changes in equity, if applicable; and

    any explanatory note annexed to.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.18   ACCOUNTING
11.18

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

True and False

1. Every public company is a listed company.
2. Shares of a private company are not listed on stock exchange.
3. It is not mandatory to incorporate a company under the companies act.
4. Company is an artificial, legal person created by law.
5. Death, insolvency or change of members affects the existence of a company.
6. If the shares are fully paid-up by the shareholder, he is subject to no further liability.
7. Public limited company has restrictions on transferability of shares.
8. Financial statements of company show the financial position of the business.
9. Schedule I gives proforma of Balance Sheet.
10. Schedule III prescribes the format of Directors' Report
11. Financial statements need to be true and correct as per Companies Act.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Which of the following statement is not a feature of a Company?
         (a) Separate legal entity
         (b) Perpetual Existence
         (c) Members have unlimited liability

2. In a Government Company, the holding of the Central Government in paid-up capital
         should not be less than
         (a) 25%
         (b) 50 %
         (c) 51%

3. Which of the following statement is true in case of a Foreign Company?
         (a) A Company incorporated in India and has place of business outside India.
         (b) A Company incorporated outside India and has a place of business in India.
         (c) A Company incorporated in India and has a place of business in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    COMPANY ACCOUNTS                                             11.19

4. Which of the following statements is not a feature of a private company?

    (a) Restricts the rights of members to transfer its shares.

    (b) Does not restrict on the number of its members to any limit.

    (c) Does not involve participation of public in general.

5.  Under Schedule III of the Companies Act, assets and liabilities are to be disclosed based on:

         (a) Current/ non-current.
         (b) Financial /non-financial.
         (c) Owned /not-owned.
6. Schedule III of the Companies Act prescribes the format and content of
         (a) Balance sheet and statement of profit and loss
         (b) Auditors' report.
         (c) Directors' report.
7. A company is required to maintain its books of accounts at
         (a) its registered office.
         (b) its largest branch office.
         (c) Managing Director's residence.
8. Cash flow statements are not required for
         (a) Private company.
         (b) One person company.
         (c) Public company.
9. The presentation and disclosure requirements of a company are prescribed by
         (a) Schedule III.
         (b) Schedule II.
         (c) Schedule I.
10. Following is an example of current assets
         (a) Inventories.
         (b) Property, Plant & Equipment.

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.20   ACCOUNTING
11.20

         (c) Intangible Assets.
11. Earnings per share (EPS) is to be disclosed in which of the following section of the

         financial statements
         (a) Balance Sheet.
         (b) Statement of Profit and Loss.
         (c) Cash Flow Statements.
12. Following is NOT an example of a company under Companies Act, 2013
         (a) Small company.
         (b) Private company.
         (c) Large company.

Theory Questions

1. Explain salient features of a company in brief.
2. Write short note on:

         (i) Foreign company.
         (ii) Small company.
         (iii) Company limited by guarantee.

ANSWER/HINTS

True and False

1. False: Listed companies are those which are listed on the stock exchange. Shares of
         listed companies are open to general public. Every listed company is a public company
         but every public company is not a listed company.

2. True: Only the shares of public company are listed on stock exchange. Every listed
         company is a public company.

3. False: It is mandatory to incorporate a company under the Companies Act. Without
         such incorporation, a company cannot come into existence.

4. True: Company comes into existence through the operation of law. It is a separate
         entity distinct from it's members.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  COMPANY ACCOUNTS                                   11.21

5. False: Company is a separate legal entity created by law. Death, insolvency or change
         of member does not affect it's existence.

6. True: Liability of shareholders is limited to the extent of the unpaid share capital. So,
         if shares are fully paid-up, he is subject to no further liability.

7. False: Shares of public company are freely transferable. Transferability of shares is
         restricted in a private limited company.

8. True: Financial statements give a true & fair view of the state of affairs of the company.
         Financial statements include profit and loss account, balance sheet, etc.

9. False: Schedule III Part I explains proforma of Balance Sheet.

10. False: Schedule III Part I explains proforma of Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss.

11. False: As per Section 128, every company shall prepare financial statement for every
         financial year which give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the company.

Multiple Choice Questions

1.  (c)  2.  (c)  3.                               (b)  4.  (b)  5.  (a)    6. (a)

7.  (a)  8.  (b)  9.                               (a) 10. (a) 11. (b) 12. (c)

Theoretical Question

1. Refer para 1.3 of this unit for salient features of a company.

2. (i) Foreign Company

                   According to Section 2 (42) of the Companies Act, 2103, "Foreign company"
                   means any company or body corporate incorporated outside India which ­

                   (a) Has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an agent
                             physically or through electronic mode; and

                   (b) Conducts any business activity in India in any other manner.

         (ii) Small Company

                   Section 2(85) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines "Small company" means a
                   company, other than a public company.

                   (i) paid-up share capital of which does not exceed four crores rupees or
                             such higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not be more than
                             ten crore rupees; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.22   ACCOUNTING
11.22

         (ii) turnover of which as per its last profit and loss account for the
                   immediately preceding financial year does not exceed forty crores
                   rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not be
                   more than hundred crore rupees.

                   Provided that nothing in this clause should apply to:

                   (A) a holding company or a subsidiary company

                   (B) a company registered under section 8

                   (C) a company or body corporate governed by any special Act

(iii) Company limited by Guarantee

         As per Section 2(21) of the Companies Act, 2013, "company limited by
         guarantee" means a company having the liability of its members limited by the
         memorandum to such amount as the members may respectively undertake to
         contribute to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound up.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
