THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK                              1.101

UNIT ­ 7 ACCOUNTING STANDARDS

                                        LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you will be able to:
 Understand the significance of issuance of Accounting Standards.
 Grasp the objectives, benefits and limitations of Accounting

       Standards.
 Learn the process of formulation of Accounting Standards by the

       Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
 Familiarize with the list of applicable Accounting Standards in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                   11..102  ACCOUNTING
                    102

UNIT OVERVIEW

                Accounting Standards deal with the issues of

Recognition of  Measurement                        Presentation of              Disclosure
  events and    of transactions                      transactions             requirements
 transactions                                        and events
                  and events

                Formulation of Accounting Standards

                                                   Identification of area

                            Constitution of study group

                            Preparation of draft and its circulation

                Ascertainment of views of different bodies on draft

                            Finalisation of exposure draft (E.D)

                Comments received on exposure draft (E.D)

                                                   Modification of the draft

                                                   Issue of AS

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK                              1.103

      7.1 INTRODUCTION OF ACCOUNTING STANDARDS

Accounting as a `language of business' communicates the financial results of an enterprise to
various stakeholders by means of financial statements. If the financial accounting process is
not properly regulated, there is possibility of financial statements being misleading,
tendentious and providing a distorted picture of the business, rather than the true. To ensure
transparency, consistency, comparability, adequacy and reliability of financial reporting, it is
essential to standardize the accounting principles and policies. Accounting Standards (ASs)
provide framework and standard accounting policies for treatment of transactions and events
so that the financial statements of different enterprises become comparable.

Accounting standards are written policy documents issued by the expert accounting body or
by the government or other regulatory body covering the aspects of recognition,
measurement, presentation and disclosure of accounting transactions and events in the
financial statements. The ostensible purpose of the standard setting bodies is to promote the
dissemination of timely and useful financial information to investors and certain other parties
having an interest in the company's economic performance. The accounting standards deal
with the issues of -

(i) recognition of events and transactions in the financial statements;

(ii) measurement of these transactions and events;

(iii) presentation of these transactions and events in the financial statements in a manner
         that is meaningful and understandable to the reader; and

(iv) the disclosure requirements which should be there to enable the public at large and
         the stakeholders and the potential investors in particular, to get an insight into what
         these financial statements are trying to reflect and thereby facilitating them to take
         prudent and informed business decisions.

      7.2 OBJECTIVES OF ACCOUNTING STANDARDS

The whole idea of accounting standards is centered around harmonisation of accounting
policies and practices followed by different business entities so that the diverse accounting
practices adopted for various aspects of accounting can be standardised. Accounting
Standards standardise diverse accounting policies with a view to:

(i) eliminate the non-comparability of financial statements and thereby improving the
         reliability of financial statements; and

(ii) provide a set of standard accounting policies, valuation norms and disclosure
         requirements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.1. 04  ACCOUNTING
104

Accounting standards reduce the accounting alternatives in the preparation of financial
statements within the bounds of rationality, thereby ensuring comparability of financial
statements of different enterprises.

      7.3 BENEFITS AND LIMITATIONS OF ACCOUNTING

      STANDARDS

Accounting standards seek to describe the accounting principles, the valuation techniques and
the methods of applying the accounting principles in the preparation and presentation of
financial statements so that they may give a true and fair view. By setting the accounting
standards, the accountant has following benefits:

(i) Standards reduce to a reasonable extent or eliminate altogether confusing variations in
         the accounting treatments used to prepare financial statements.

(ii) There are certain areas where important information are not statutorily required to be
         disclosed. Standards may call for disclosure beyond that required by law.

(iii) The application of accounting standards would, to a limited extent, facilitate
         comparison of financial statements of companies situated in different parts of the world
         and also of different companies situated in the same country. However, it should be
         noted in this respect that differences in the institutions, traditions and legal systems
         from one country to another give rise to differences in accounting standards adopted in
         different countries.

                                                   Standardisation
                                                    of Alternative

                                                      accounting
                                                      treatments

                                                   Benefits of
                                                   Accounting
                                                   Standards

          Comparability                                             Requirements
           of financial                                             for additional
           statements
                                                                     disclosures

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK                               1.105

However, there are some limitations of accounting standards:

(i) Difficulties in making choice between different treatments: Alternative solutions to
         certain accounting problems may each have arguments to recommend them.
         Therefore, the choice between different alternative accounting treatments may become
         difficult.

(ii) Restricted scope: Accounting standards cannot override the statute. The standards are
         required to be framed within the ambit of prevailing statutes.

  Limitations of                                     Difficulties in  Restricted scope
   accounting                                       making choice

   standards                                       between different
                                                      treatments

  7.4 PROCESS OF FORMULATION OF ACCOUNTING
  STANDARDS IN INDIA

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), being a premier accounting body in the
country, took upon itself the leadership role by constituting the Accounting Standards Board
(ASB) in 1977. The ICAI has taken significant initiatives in the setting and issuing procedure of
Accounting Standards to ensure that the standard-setting process is fully consultative and
transparent. The ASB considers International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) while
framing Indian Accounting Standards (ASs) in India and try to integrate them, in the light of
the applicable laws, customs, usages and business environment in the country. The
composition of ASB includes, representatives of industries (namely, ASSOCHAM, CII, FICCI),
regulators, academicians, government departments etc. Although ASB is a body constituted
by the Council of the ICAI, it (ASB) is independent in the formulation of accounting standards
and Council of the ICAI is not empowered to make any modifications in the draft accounting
standards formulated by ASB without consulting with the ASB.

The standard-setting procedure of Accounting Standards Board (ASB) can be briefly outlined
as follows:

  Identification of broad areas by ASB for formulation of AS.

  Constitution of study groups by ASB to consider specific projects and to prepare

  preliminary drafts of the proposed accounting standards. The draft normally includes

  objective and scope of the standard, definitions of the terms used in the standard,

  recognition and measurement principles wherever applicable and presentation and

  disclosure requirements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         11..106  ACCOUNTING
         106

  Consideration of the preliminary draft prepared by the study group of ASB and

  revision, if any, of the draft on the basis of deliberations.

  Circulation of draft of accounting standard (after revision by ASB) to the Council

  members of the ICAI and specified outside bodies such as Department of Company

  Affairs (DCA), Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Comptroller and Auditor

  General of India (C&AG), Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), Standing Conference

  of Public Enterprises (SCOPE), etc. for comments.

  Meeting with the representatives of the specified outside bodies to ascertain their

  views on the draft of the proposed accounting standard.

  Finalisation of the exposure draft of the proposed accounting standard and its issuance

  inviting public comments.

  Consideration of comments received on the exposure draft and finalisation of the draft

  accounting standard by the ASB for submission to the Council of the ICAI for its

  consideration and approval for issuance.

  Consideration of the final draft of the proposed standard and by the Council of the

  ICAI, and if found necessary, modification of the draft in consultation with the ASB is

  done.

  The accounting standard on the relevant subject (for non-corporate entities) is then

  issued by the ICAI. For unlisted corporate entities, having net worth of less than 250

  crores the accounting standards are issued by The Central Government of India.

There are three sets of Accounting Standards to cater different categories of entities based on
their nature, size, and legal framework under which they operate, ensuring that each entity
follows appropriate accounting principles for financial reporting These are:

(i) Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) are applicable to all listed companies and
         Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) and to unlisted companies and unlisted
         NBFCs with net worth of INR 250 crores or more.

(ii) Accounting Standards (AS) notified under Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules,
         2021, are applicable to the companies other than those following Ind AS, as given in
         point (i). These companies are required to apply Accounting Standards (AS) notified
         under the Companies Act as Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 2021.

(iii) Accounting Standards (AS) prescribed by ICAI are applicable for entities other than
         companies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                     THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK              1.107

     7.5 LIST OF ACCOUNTING STANDARDS IN INDIA

The `Accounting Standards' issued by the Accounting Standards Board establish standards
which have to be complied by the business entities so that the financial statements are
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

Following is the list of applicable Accounting Standards:

                                         List* of Accounting Standards

Sl.  Number of the Title of the Accounting Standard

No. Accounting

     Standard (AS)

1.   AS 1            Disclosure of Accounting Policies

2.   AS 2 (Revised)  Valuation of Inventories

3.   AS 3 (Revised)  Cash Flow Statements

4.   AS 4 (Revised)  Contingencies and Events Occurring after the Balance Sheet

                     Date

5.   AS 5 (Revised)  Net Profit or Loss for the Period, Prior Period Items and

                     Changes in Accounting Policies

6.   AS 7 (Revised)  Accounting for Construction Contracts

7.   AS 9            Revenue Recognition

8.   AS 10           Property, Plant and Equipment

9.   AS 11 (Revised) The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates

10.  AS 12           Accounting for Government Grants

11.  AS 13           Accounting for Investments

12.  AS 14           Accounting for Amalgamations

13.  AS 15 (Revised) Employee Benefits

14.  AS 16           Borrowing Costs

15.  AS 17           Segment Reporting

16.  AS 18           Related Party Disclosures

17.  AS 19           Leases

18.  AS 20           Earnings Per Share

19.  AS 21           Consolidated Financial Statements

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        11..108  ACCOUNTING
        108

20.     AS 22    Accounting for Taxes on Income
                 Accounting for Investments in Associates in Consolidated
21.     AS 23    Financial Statements
                 Discontinuing Operations
22.     AS 24    Interim Financial Reporting
                 Intangible Assets
23.     AS 25    Financial Reporting of Interests in Joint Ventures
                 Impairment of Assets
24.     AS 26    Provisions, Contingent Liabilities & Contingent Assets

25.     AS 27

26.     AS 28

27.     AS 29

* Note: The list of accounting standards given above does not form part of syllabus. It
has been given here for the knowledge of students only.

**Indian Accounting Standards (IND AS)

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) being the accounting standards-setting
body in India, way back in 2006, initiated the process of moving towards the International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) issued by the International Accounting Standards Board
(IASB) with a view to enhance acceptability and transparency of the financial information
communicated by the Indian corporates through their financial statements. This move towards
IFRS was subsequently accepted by the Government of India.

The Government of India in consultation with the ICAI decided to converge and not to adopt
IFRSs issued by the IASB. The decision of convergence rather than adoption was taken after
the detailed analysis of IFRS requirements and extensive discussion with various stakeholders.
Accordingly, while formulating IFRS- converged Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS), efforts
have been made to keep these Standards, as far as possible, in line with the corresponding IFRS
and departures have been made where considered absolutely essential. Certain changes have
been made considering the economic environment of the country, which is different as
compared to the economic environment presumed to be in existence by IFRS.

List of Ind as on 1st August, 2024

Ind AS  Title of Ind AS
  101   First -Time Adoption of Indian Accounting Standards
  102   Share- Based Payment
  103   Business Combinations

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK                      1.109

Ind AS  Title of Ind AS
  104   Insurance Contracts
  105   Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations
  106   Exploration for and Evaluation of Mineral Resources
  107   Financial Instruments: Disclosures
  108   Operating Segments
  109   Financial Instruments
  110   Consolidated Financial Statements
  111   Joint Arrangements
  112   Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities
  113   Fair Value Measurement
  114   Regulatory Deferral Accounts
  115   Revenue from Contracts with Customers
  116   Leases
   1    Presentation of Financial Statements
   2    Inventories
   7    Statement of Cash Flows
   8    Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors
  10    Events after the Reporting Period
  12    Income Taxes
  16    Property, Plant and Equipment
  19    Employee Benefits
  20    Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance
  21    The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates
  23    Borrowing Costs
  24    Related Party Disclosures
  27    Separate Financial Statements
  28    Investment in Associates and Joint Ventures
  29    Financial Reporting in Hyperinflationary Economies
  32    Financial Instruments: Presentation
  33    Earnings per Share
  34    Interim Financial Reporting

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        11..110              ACCOUNTING
        110

Ind AS  Title of Ind AS
  36    Impairment of Assets
  37    Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
  38    Intangible Assets
  40    Investment Property
  41    Agriculture

**Accounting Standards for Local Bodies

Accounting Standards for local bodies are Accounting Standards that are applicable to the
local bodies whose primary objective is to deliver services to the public, rather than to make
profits and generate a return on equity to investors. Consequently, the performance of such
entities can be only partially evaluated by examination of financial position, financial
performance and cash flows.

List of Accounting Standards for Local Bodies (ASLB) as on
1st August, 2024

  ASLB  Title of ASLB
1       Presentation of Financial Statements
2       Cash Flow Statements
3       Accounting Policies, changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors

4       The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates

5       Borrowing Costs

9       Revenue from Exchange Transactions

11      Construction Contracts

12      Inventories

13      Leases

14      Events After the Reporting Date

16      Investment Property

17      Property, Plant and Equipment

18      Segment Reporting

19      Provision, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets

20      Related Party Disclosures

21      Impairment of Non-Cash-Generating Assets

23      Revenue from Non-Exchange Transaction (Taxes and Transfers)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK                             1.111

  ASLB Title of ASLB

24  Presentation of Budget Information in Financial Statements

26  Impairment of Cash-Generating Assets

31  Intangible Assets

32  Service Concession Arrangements: Grantor

33  First-Time Adoption of Accrual Basis Accounting Standards for Local Bodies (ASLBs)

34  Separate Financial Statements

35  Consolidated Financial Statements

36  Investment in Associates and Joint Ventures

37  Joint Arrangements

38  Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities

39  Employee Benefits

40  Entity Combinations

42  Social Benefits

    Financial Reporting under Cash Basis of Accounting

**Note: Ind AS and ASLB given above do not form part of the syllabus. They have been
discussed here for the knowledge of students only.

SUMMARY

    Accounting Standards (ASs) provide framework and standard accounting policies for

    treatment of transactions and events so that the financial statements of different

    enterprises become comparable. Accounting Standards standardise diverse

    accounting policies with a view to:

    (i) eliminate the non-comparability of financial statements

    (ii) provide a set of standard accounting policies, valuation norms and disclosure
             requirements

    By setting the accounting standards, the accountant has following benefits:

    (i) Comparability of financial statements

    (ii) Requirements of additional disclosures

    Following are the limitations of accounting standards

    (i) Difficulties in making choice between different treatments.
    (ii) Accounting standards cannot override the statute

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11..112  ACCOUNTING
112

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

True and False

1. Accounting standards are written policy documents issued by the expert accounting body
         or by the government or other regulatory body covering the aspects of recognition,
         measurement, presentation and disclosure of accounting transactions and events in the
         financial statements.

2. Accounting standards can override the statute.
3. Difficulties in making choice between different treatments is one of the benefits of

         accounting standards.
4. Requirements for additional disclosures is limitation of accounting standards.
5. ASB stands for Accounting standardisation benchmarking.
6. There are no limitation to accounting standards.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Accounting Standards for Non-Corporate entities in India are issued by
         (a) Central Govt.
         (b) State Govt.
         (c) Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.

2. Accounting Standards
         (a) Harmonise accounting policies.
         (b) Eliminate the non-comparability of financial statements.
         (c) Both the above.

3. It is essential to standardize the accounting principles and policies in order to ensure
         (a) Transparency.
         (b) Consistency.
         (c) Both the above.

Theoretical Questions

1. Explain the objective of "Accounting Standards" in brief.
2. State the advantages of setting Accounting Standards.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK                    1.113

ANSWERS/HINTS

True and False

1. True: Accounting standards are documents covering recognition, measurement, presentation
         and disclosure of accounting transactions and events in the financial statements.

2. False: Accounting standards can never override the statute. The standards are required
         to be framed within the ambit of prevailing statutes.

3. False: Difficulties in making choice between different treatments is one of the limitation of
         accounting standard.

4. False: Benefits of accounting standards are:

·  Standardisation of alternative accounting treatments

·  Comparability of financial statements

·  Requirements for additional disclosures.

5. False: ASB stands for Accounting Standard Board.

6. False: limitations of accounting standards

·  Difficulties in making choice between different treatments

·  Restricted scope

Multiple Choice Questions

    1. (c) 2. (c) 3. (c)

Theoretical Questions

1. Accounting Standards are selected set of accounting policies or broad guidelines
         regarding the principles and methods to be chosen out of several alternatives. The
         main objective of Accounting Standards is to establish standards which have to be
         complied with, to ensure that financial statements are prepared in accordance with
         generally accepted accounting principles. Accounting Standards seek to suggest rules
         and criteria of accounting measurements. These standards harmonize the diverse
         accounting policies and practices at present in use in India.

2. The main advantage of setting accounting standards is that the adoption and application of
         accounting standards ensure uniformity, comparability and qualitative improvement in the
         preparation and presentation of financial statements. The other advantages are:

         Reduction in variations; Disclosures beyond that required by law and Facilitates comparison.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
