THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK      1.61

UNIT ­ 3 CAPITAL AND REVENUE EXPENDITURES
                          AND RECEIPTS

                                              LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you will be able to:
 Learn the criteria for identifying Revenue Expenditure and

       distinguishing from Capital Expenditure
 Learn the distinction between capital and revenue receipts.
 Understand the linkage of such distinction with the preparation of

       final accounts.

UNIT OVERVIEW

 Capital       · Payments
Revenue        · Receipts

               · Payments
               · Receipts

      3.1 INTRODUCTION

Accounting aims in ascertaining and presenting the results of the business for an accounting
period. For ascertaining the periodical business results, the nature of transactions should be
analyzed whether they are of capital or revenue nature. Revenue Expense relates to the
operations of the business of an accounting period or to the revenue earned during the period
or the items of expenditure, benefits of which do not extend beyond that period. Capital
Expenditure, on the other hand, generates enduring benefits and helps in revenue generation
over more than one accounting period. Revenue Expenses must be associated with a physical
activity of the entity. Therefore, whereas production and sales generate revenue in the earning
process, use of goods and services in support of those functions causes expenses to occur.
11..6622  ACCOUNTING

Expenses are recognised in the Profit & Loss Account through matching principal which tells
us when and how much of the expenses to be charged against revenue. A part of the
expenditure can be capitalised only when these can be traced directly to definable streams of
future benefits.

The distinction of transaction into revenue and capital is done for the purpose of placing them
in Profit and Loss account or in the Balance Sheet. For example: revenue expenditures are
shown in the profit and loss account as their benefits are for one accounting period i.e., in
which they are incurred while capital expenditures are placed on the asset side of the balance
sheet as they will generate benefits for more than one accounting period and will be
transferred to profit and loss account of the year on the basis of utilisation of that benefit in
particular accounting year. Hence, both capital and revenue expenditures are ultimately
transferred to profit and loss account.

Revenue expenditures are transferred to profit and loss account in the year of spending while
capital expenditures are transferred to profit and loss account of the year in which their
benefits are utilised. Therefore, we can conclude that it is the time factor, which is the main
determinant for transferring the expenditure to profit and loss account. Also, expenses are
recognized in profit and loss account through matching concept which tells us when and how
much of the expenses to be charged against revenue. However, distinction between capital and
revenue creates a considerable difficulty. In many cases borderline between the two is very thin.

      3.2 CONSIDERATIONS IN DETERMINING CAPITAL
      AND REVENUE EXPENDITURES

The basic considerations in distinction between capital and revenue expenditures are:

(a) Nature of business: For a trader dealing in furniture, purchase of furniture is revenue
         expenditure but for any other trade, the purchase of furniture should be treated as
         capital expenditure and shown in the balance sheet as asset. Therefore, the nature of
         business is a very important criteria in separating an expenditure between capital and
         revenue.

(b) Recurring nature of expenditure: If the frequency of an expense is quite often in an
         accounting year then it is said to be an expenditure of revenue nature while non-
         recurring expenditure is infrequent in nature and do not occur often in an accounting
         year. Monthly salary or rent is the example of revenue expenditure as they are incurred
         every month while purchase of assets is not the transaction done regularly therefore,
         classified as capital expenditure unless materiality criteria defines it as revenue
         expenditure.
                   THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK           1.63

(c) Purpose of expenses: Expenses for repairs of machine may be incurred in course of
         normal maintenance of the asset. Such expenses are revenue in nature. On the other
         hand, expenditure incurred for major repair of the asset so as to increase its productive
         capacity is capital in nature. However, determination of the cost of maintenance and
         ordinary repairs which should be expensed, as opposed to a cost which ought to be
         capitalised, is not always simple.

(d) Effect on revenue generating capacity of business: The expenses which help to
         generate income/ revenue in the current period are revenue in nature and should be
         matched against the revenue earned in the current period. On the other hand, if
         expenditure helps to generate revenue over more than one accounting period, it is
         generally called capital expenditure.

         When expenditure on improvements and repair of a fixed asset is done, it has to be
         charged to Profit and Loss Account if the expected future benefits from fixed assets do
         not change, and it will be included in book value of fixed asset, where the expected
         future benefits from assets increase.

(e) Materiality of the amount involved: Relative proportion of the amount involved is
         another important consideration in distinction between revenue and capital.

3.3 CAPITAL EXPENDITURES                           AND   REVENUE
EXPENDITURES

As we have already discussed, capital expenditure contributes to the revenue earning capacity
of a business over more than one accounting period whereas revenue expense is incurred to
generate revenue for a particular accounting period. The revenue expenses either occur in
direct relation with the revenue or in relation with accounting periods, for example cost of
goods sold, salaries, rent, etc. Cost of goods sold is directly related to sales revenue whereas
rent is related to the particular accounting period. Capital expenditure may represent
acquisition of any tangible or intangible fixed assets for enduring future benefits. Therefore, the
benefits arising out of capital expenditure last for more than one accounting period whereas
those arising out of revenue expenses expire in the same accounting period.

3.3.1 Key differences between Capital and Revenue Expenditures

Key Differences    Capital Expenditure             Revenue Expenditure
Period of benefit
                   Any expenditure incurred to     Any expenditure incurred to
                   provide a benefit over a long-  provide a benefit during the
                   term period is capital          current period is revenue
                   expenditure.                    expenditure.
             11..6644  ACCOUNTING

Enhancement            vs Capital expenditure is incurred Revenue expenditure is incurred
Maintenance                 for the purpose of increasing the to maintain the earning capacity
                            capacity of the business. of the business.
Examples                    Alternatively, it also includes an
                            expenditure to reduce the costs
                            of the business.

                       Purchase of machine, car, Repairs and maintenance, salary

                       furniture, etc.                      of accounting staff, etc.

ILLUSTRATION 1

State with reasons whether the following statements are `True' or `False'.

(1) Overhaul expenses of second-hand machinery purchased are Revenue Expenditure.

(2) Money spent to reduce working expenses is Revenue Expenditure.

(3) Legal fees to acquire property is Capital Expenditure.

(4) Amount spent as lawyer's fee to defend a suit claiming that the firm's factory site
         belonged to the plaintiff's land is Capital Expenditure.

(5) Amount spent for replacement of worn out part of machine is Capital Expenditure.

(6) Expense incurred on the repairs and white washing for the first time on purchase of an
         old building are Revenue Expenses.

(7) Expenses in connection with obtaining a license for running the cinema is Capital
         Expenditure.

(8) Amount spent for the construction of temporary huts, which were necessary for
         construction of the Cinema House and were demolished when the cinema house was
         ready, is Capital Expenditure.

SOLUTION

(1) False: Overhaul expenses are incurred to put second-hand machinery in working
         condition to derive endurable long-term advantage. So it should be capitalised.

(2) False: It may be reasonably presumed that money spent for reducing revenue
         expenditure would have generated long-term benefits to the entity. So this is capital
         expenditure.

(3) True: Legal fee paid to acquire any property is part of the cost of that property. It is
         incurred to possess the ownership right of the property and hence a capital
         expenditure.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  1.65

(4) False: Legal expenses incurred to defend a suit claiming that the firm's factory site
         belongs to the plaintiff is maintenance expenditure of the asset. By this expense,
         neither any endurable benefit can be obtained in future in addition to that what is
         presently available nor the capacity of the asset will be increased. Maintenance
         expenditure in relation to an asset is revenue expenditure.

(5) False: Amount spent for replacement of any worn out part of a machine is revenue
         expense since it is part of its maintenance cost.

(6) False: Repairing and white washing expenses for the first time of an old building are
         incurred to put the building in usable condition. These are the part of the cost of
         building. Accordingly, these are capital expenditure.

(7) True: The Cinema Hall could not be started without license. Expenditure incurred to
         obtain the license is pre-operative expense which is capitalised. Such expenses are
         amortised over a period of time.

(8) True: Cost of temporary huts constructed which were necessary for the construction
         of the cinema house is part of the construction cost of the cinema house. Therefore
         such costs are to be capitalised.

ILLUSTRATION 2

State with reasons whether the following are Capital or Revenue Expenditure:

(1) Expenses incurred in connection with obtaining a license for starting the factory for
         ` 10,000.

(2) ` 1,000 paid for removal of Inventory to a new site.

(3) Rings and Pistons of an engine were changed at a cost of ` 5,000 to get fuel efficiency.

(4) Money paid to Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. (MTNL) ` 8,000 for installing telephone
         in the office.

(5) A factory shed was constructed at a cost of ` 1,00,000. A sum of ` 5,000 had been incurred
         in the construction of temporary huts for storing building material.

SOLUTION

(1) Money paid ` 10,000 for obtaining license to start a factory is a capital expenditure.
         This is an item of expenditure incurred to acquire the right to carry on business.

(2) ` 1,000 paid for removal of Inventory to a new site is revenue expenditure. This is
         neither bringing enduring benefit nor enhancing the value of the asset.
11..6666  ACCOUNTING

(3) ` 5,000 spent in changing Rings and Pistons of an engine to get fuel efficiency is capital
         expenditure. This is an expenditure on improvement of a fixed asset. It results in
         increasing profit-earning capacity of the business by cost reduction.

(4) Money deposited with MTNL for installation of telephone in office is not expenditure.
         This is treated as an asset and the same is adjusted over a period of time against actual
         telephone bills.

(5) Cost of construction of building including cost of temporary huts is capital expenditure.
         Building is fixed asset which will generate enduring benefit to the business over more
         than one accounting period. Construction of temporary huts is incidental to the main
         construction. Such cost is also capitalised with the cost of building.

ILLUSTRATION 3

Best Tech Solutions buys and sells computers as a part of its business. It purchased 20 computers
for resale to its customers. Cost of each computer is ` 20,000. It also purchased a computer
costing ` 24,000 for its accountant to be able to maintain the accounting records and printing
of invoices. Suggest whether above transactions qualify as capital expenditure or revenue
expenditure transactions?

SOLUTION

Best Tech Solutions is in the business of buying and selling of computers. Any computers
purchased for resale to its customers will qualify as revenue expenditure. Hence, a purchase
of 20,000 x 20 = ` 4,00,000 will be a part of revenue expenditure.

At the same time, the computer purchased for maintaining the records and invoicing is to be
able to operate the business for a longer period of time. Therefore, the purchase of ` 24,000
qualifies as a capital expenditure. This amount will be a part of assets in the Balance Sheet.

      3.4 CAPITAL RECEIPTS AND REVENUE RECEIPTS

Just as a clear distinction between Capital and Revenue expenditure is necessary, in the same
manner capital receipts must be distinguished from revenue receipts.

Receipts which are obtained in course of normal business activities are revenue receipts (e.g.,
receipts from sale of goods or services, interest income etc.). On the other hand, receipts
which are not revenue in nature are capital receipts (e.g., receipts from sale of fixed assets or
investments, secured or unsecured loans, owners' contributions etc.). Revenue and capital
receipts are recognised on accrual basis as soon as the right of receipt is established. Revenue
receipts should not be equated with the actual cash receipts. Revenue receipts are credited to
the Profit and Loss Account.
                THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK                                1.67

On the other hand, Capital receipts are not directly credited to Profit and Loss Account. For
example, when a fixed asset is sold for ` 92,000 (cost ` 90,000), the capital receipts ` 92,000 is
not credited to Profit and Loss Account. Profit or Loss on sale of fixed assets is calculated and
credited to Profit and Loss Account as follows:

Sale Proceeds   ` 92,000

Cost            (` 90,000)

Profit          ` 2,000

ILLUSTRATION 4

State with reasons whether the below items relating to the business of AB td are capital or
revenue receipts?

(a) A machine with a book value of ` 10 lakh is sold for ` 12 lakh.

(b) Premium amounting to ` 1 Lakh received on issue of shares

(c) An amount of ` 20,000 received from goods sold in cash.

(d) An amount of ` 5 lac received on the maturity of fixed deposit from bank. Also, an interest
         of ` 40,000 was received in addition to the maturity amount of the fixed deposits.

SOLUTION

(a) The amount of ` 12 lac is a capital receipt. There is a profit on sale of the machine to
         the extent of ` 2 lac (12 ­ 10)

(b) Premium received on issue of shares is an example of capital receipt.

(c) Amount received from cash sale is a revenue receipt.

(d) Amount received on the maturity of fixed deposit is the recovery of the deposit
         amount, and is a capital receipt. Interest income is an example of revenue receipt.

ILLUSTRATION 5

Good Pictures Ltd., constructs a cinema house and incurs the following expenditure during the
first year ending 31st March, 2022.

(1) Second-hand furniture worth ` 9,000 was purchased; repainting of the furniture costs
         `1,000. The furniture was installed by own workmen, wages for this being ` 200.

(2) Expenses in connection with obtaining a license for running the cinema worth ` 20,000.
         During the course of the year the cinema company was fined ` 1,000, for contravening
         rules. Renewal fee `2,000 for next year also paid.

(3) Fire insurance, ` 1,000 was paid on 1st October, 2021 for one year.
11..6688  ACCOUNTING

(4) Temporary huts were constructed costing ` 1,200. They were necessary for the
         construction of the cinema. They were demolished when the cinema was ready.

Point out how you would classify the above items.

SOLUTION
(1) The total cost of the furniture should be treated as ` 10,200 i.e., all the amounts

         mentioned should be capitalised since without such expenditure the furniture would
         not be available for use. If ` 1,000 and ` 200 have been respectively debited to the
         Repairs Account and the Wages Account, these accounts will be credited to the Furniture
         Account.

(2) License for running the cinema house is necessary, hence its cost should be capitalised.
         But the fine of ` 1,000 is revenue expenditure. The renewal fee for the next year is also
         revenue expenditure but pertains to the next year; hence, it is a prepaid expense.

(3) Half of the insurance premium pertains to the year beginning on 1st April, 2021. Hence
         such amount should be treated as prepaid expense. The remaining amount is revenue
         expense for the current year.

(4) Since the temporary huts were necessary for the construction, their cost should be
         added to the cost of the cinema hall and thus capitalised.

ILLUSTRATION 6

State with reasons, how you would classify the following items of expenditure:

(1) Overhauling expenses of ` 25,000 for the engine of a motor car to get better fuel efficiency.

(2) Inauguration expenses of ` 25 lacs incurred on the opening of a new manufacturing unit
         in an existing business.

(3) Compensation of ` 2.5 crores paid to workers, who opted for voluntary retirement.

SOLUTION

(1) Overhauling expenses are incurred for the engine of a motor car to derive better fuel
         efficiency. These expenses will reduce the running cost in future and thus the benefit
         is in form of endurable long-term advantage. So this expenditure should be capitalised.

(2) Inauguration expenses incurred on the opening of a new unit may help to explore more
         customers This expenditure is in the nature of revenue expenditure, as the expenditure
         may not generate any enduring benefit to the business over more than one accounting
         period.

(3) The amount paid to workers on voluntary retirement is in the nature of revenue
         expenditure since it represents compensation for termination of employment and
         does not result in the creation of any asset or future economic benefit.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  1.69

ILLUSTRATION 7
Classify the following expenditures and receipts as capital or revenue:
(i) ` 10,000 spent as travelling expenses of the directors on trips abroad for purchase of

         capital assets.

(ii) Amount received from Trade receivables during the year.

(iii) Amount spent on demolition of building to construct a bigger building on the same site.

(iv) Insurance claim received on account of a machinery damaged by fire.

SOLUTION

(i) Capital expenditure.

(ii) Revenue receipt.

(iii) Capital expenditure.

(iv) Capital receipt.
ILLUSTRATION 8
Are the following expenditures capital in nature?

(i) M/s ABC & Co. run a restaurant. They renovate some of the old cabins. Because of this
         renovation some space was made free and number of cabins was increased from 10 to 13.
         The total expenditure was ` 20,000.

(ii) M/s New Delhi Financing Co. sold certain goods on installment payment basis. Five
         customers did not pay installments. To recover such outstanding installments, the firm
         spent ` 10,000 on account of legal expenses.

(iii) M/s Ballav & Co. of Delhi purchased a machinery from M/s Shah & Co. of Ahmedabad.
         M/s Ballav & Co. spent ` 40,000 for transportation of such machinery. The year ending
         is 31st Dec, 2022.

SOLUTION

(i) Renovation of cabins increased the number of cabins. This has an effect on the future
         revenue generating capability of the business. Thus, the renovation expense is capital
         expenditure in nature.

(ii) Expense incurred to recover installments due from customer do not increase the
         revenue generating capability in future. It is a normal recurring expense of the business.
         Thus, the legal expenses incurred in this case is revenue expenditure in nature.

(iii) Expenses incurred on account of transportation of fixed asset is capital expenditure in
         nature.
  11..7700  ACCOUNTING

SUMMARY

  Revenue expenditures are shown in the profit and loss account while capital

  expenditures are placed on the asset side of the balance sheet since they generate

  benefits for more than are accounting period.

  Prepaid expenses are future expenses that have been paid in advance. These are shown

  in the balance sheet as an asset.

  Receipts obtained should be classified between revenue receipts and capital receipts.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

True and False

1. The nature of business is not an important criteria in separating an expenditure between
         capital and revenue.

2. Expenditure incurred for major repair of the asset so as to increase its productive capacity
         is Revenue in nature.

3. Amount spent as lawyer's fee to defend a suit claiming that the firm's factory site
         belonged to the plaintiff's land is Capital Expenditure.

4. Amount spent for replacement of worn-out part of machine is Capital Expenditure.
5. Legal fees to acquire property is Capital Expenditure.
6. Amount spent for the construction of temporary huts, which were necessary for

         construction of the cinema house and were demolished when the cinema house was
         ready, is Capital Expenditure.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Money spent ` 10,000 as traveling expenses of the directors on trips abroad for purchase of
         capital assets is
         (a) Capital expenditures
         (b) Revenue expenditures
         (c) Prepaid revenue expenditures
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  1.71

2. Amount of ` 5,000 spent as lawyers' fee to defend a suit claiming that the firm's factory site
         belonged to the plaintiff's land is
         (a) Capital expenditures
         (b) Revenue expenditures
         (c) Prepaid revenue expenditures

3. Entrance fee of ` 2,000 received by Ram and Shyam Social Club is
         (a) Capital receipt
         (b) Revenue receipt
         (c) Capital expenditures

4. Subsidy of ` 40,000 received from the government for working capital by a
         manufacturing concern is
         (a) Capital receipt
         (b) Revenue receipt
         (c) Capital expenditures

5. Insurance claim received on account of
         (a) Capital receipt
         (b) Revenue receipt
         (c) Capital expenditures

6. Interest on investments received from
         (a) Capital receipt
         (b) Revenue receipt
         (c) Capital expenditures

7. Amount received from IDBI as a medium term loan for augmenting working capital is
         (a) Capital expenditures
         (b) Revenue expenditures
         (c) Capital receipt

8. Revenue from sale of products, ordinarily, is reported as part of the earning in the period in which
         (a) The sale is made.
         (b) The cash is collected.
         (c) The products are manufactured.
    11..7722      ACCOUNTING

9. If repair cost is ` 25,000, whitewash expenses are ` 5,000, (both these expenses relate to
         presently used building) cost of extension of building is ` 2,50,000 and cost of
         improvement in electrical wiring system is `19,000; the amount to be expensed is
         (a) ` 2,99,000.
         (b) ` 44,000.
         (c) ` 30,000.

Theoretical Questions

1. What are the basic considerations in distinguishing between capital and revenue
         expenditures?

2. Define revenue receipts and give examples. How are these receipts treated?

ANSWERS/HINTS

True and False

1.  False: The nature of business is a very important criteria in separating an expenditure

    between capital and revenue. For example- For a trader dealing in furniture, purchase

    of furniture is revenue expenditure but for any other trade, the purchase of furniture

    should be treated as capital expenditure and shown in the balance sheet as asset. .

2.  False: Expenditure incurred for major repair of the asset so as to increase its productive

    capacity is capital in nature.

3.  False: Legal expenses incurred to defend a suit claiming that the firm's factory site

    belongs to the plaintiff is maintenance expenditure of the asset. By this expense,

    neither any endurable benefit can be obtained in future in addition to that what is

    presently available nor the capacity of the asset will be increased. Maintenance

    expenditure in relation to an asset is revenue expenditure.

4.  False: Amount spent for replacement of any worn out part of a machine is revenue

    expense since it is part of its maintenance cost.

5.  True: Legal fee paid to acquire any property is a part of cost of that property. It is

    incurred to possess the ownership right of the property and hence a capital

    expenditure.

6.  True: Since temporary huts were necessary for the construction, their cost should be

    added to the cost of the cinema hall and thus capitalised.
             THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK           1.73

Multiple Choice Questions

1.  (a)  2.  (b)  3.       (a)  4.  (b)  5.  (a)   6.  (b)

7.  (c)  8.  (a)  9.       (c)

Theoretical Questions

1. The basic considerations in distinction between capital and revenue expenditures are:
         (a) Nature of business.
         (b) Recurring nature of expenditure.
         (c) Purpose of expenses.
         (d) Effect on revenue generating capacity of business.
         (e) Materiality of the amount involved.

2. Receipts which are obtained in course of normal business activities are revenue
         receipts (e.g,. receipts from sale of goods or services, interest income etc.).
         Revenue receipts should not be equated with the actual cash receipts. Revenue receipts
         are credited to the Profit and Loss Account.
