CHAPTER  7

PREPARATION OF FINAL
ACCOUNTS OF SOLE
PROPRIETORS

UNIT ­ 1 FINAL ACCOUNTS OF NON-
      MANUFACTURING ENTITIES

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to:

 Draw final Accounts of Non- manufacturing entities.
 Learn the relationship between Profit and Loss Account and Balance Sheet.
 Understand the Trading Account items. This will help you to learn which of the

         transactions and events should be shown in the Trading Account.
 Understand the items shown in the Profit and Loss Account. By that you will

         learn the technique of preparing Profit and Loss Account and deriving the Profit
         and Loss balance.
 Learn how to adjust outstanding and pre-paid expenses, accrued income and
         income received in advance.
 Understand the items to be shown in the balance sheet. Also learn the
         classification of assets and liabilities and the order by which they are presented
         in the Balance Sheet.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.2.2                      ACCOUNTING

UNIT OVERVIEW

                           NON-MANUFACTURING BUSINESS ENTITIES

                            Final Accounts

Trading Account             Profit & Loss Account                        Balance Sheet

      1.1 INTRODUCTION

Non-manufacturing entities are the trading entities, which are engaged in the purchase and
sale of goods for profit without changing the form/ underlying use of such goods. In other
words, non-manufacturing entities do not process the goods purchased rather sell them in
their original form. Meanwhile the entity indulges in some liabilities, makes some assets and
also incurs some expenses like salaries, stationery expenses, advertisement, rent etc. to run
the business. At the end of the accounting year, the entity must be interested in knowing the
results of the business. To ascertain the final outcome of the business i.e., the income and
financial position, they prepare financial statements at the end of the accounting year.

                                                   Financial Statements

Income Statement                                                         Position Statement

Trading Account             Profit & Loss Account                        Balance Sheet

Gross Profit or Gross Loss  Net Profit or Net Loss  Position of Assets & Liabilities

Financial Statements are the systematically organized summary of all the ledger account heads
and presented in such a manner that it gives detailed information about the financial position
and the performance of the entity. As seen above, through categorization of Financial
Statements into Income & Position Statement, the profit or loss is measured at two levels:

(a) Gross Profit or Gross Loss

(b) Net Profit or Net Loss

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                      7.3

                  SOLE PROPRIETORS

The profit or loss of the enterprise is obtained through the preparation of Income Statement
i.e. Trading and Profit & Loss A/c

The financial position of the business enterprise is assessed by measuring the assets, liabilities
and capital of the enterprise and the same is communicated to the users of financial
statements. Financial position of the enterprise can be known through the preparation of the
Position Statement i.e. Balance Sheet.

Comparison between Income Statement and Position Statement

Income Statement                                   Position statement

Profit or loss is presented in the Income It exhibits assets and liabilities of the
Statement prepared at the close of the business as at the close of the financial year.
financial year

Income Statement is sub-divided into               Apart from balance sheet, to assess the
following two parts for a non-manufacturing        financial position of the business, sometimes
concern:                                           additional statements are also prepared like
                                                   cash flow statement, statement of changes in
(i) Trading account; and                           equity etc. which is not mandatory for non-
                                                   corporate entities. These additional
(ii) Profit and Loss account                       statements are prepared for the better
                                                   understanding of the financial position of
                                                   the business.

Income Statement discloses net profit or net       Position statement discloses the assets and
loss of the business after adjusting from the      liabilities position as on a particular date.
income earned during the year, all the
expenditures of the business incurred in that
year.

      1.2 PREPARATION OF FINAL ACCOUNTS

The principal function of final accounts (Trading Account, Profit and Loss Account and the
Balance Sheet) is to exhibit truly and fairly the performance and the financial position of the
business to which they relate. In order that these may be properly drawn up, it is essential that
a proper record of transactions entered into by the business during a particular accounting
period should be maintained. The BASIC PRINCIPLES in regard to accumulation of accounting
period data are:

(i) a distinction should be made between capital and revenue receipts and payments.

(ii) income and expenses relating to a period of account should be separated from those
         of another period.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.4.4  ACCOUNTING

(iii) different items of income and expenditure should be accumulated under significant
         heads so as to disclose the sources from which capital has been procured and the
         nature of liabilities, which are outstanding for payment.

Having regard to these basic principles, the various matters to which attention should be paid
for determining the different aspects of transactions, a record of which should be kept, and
the different heads of account under which various items of income and expenditure should
be accumulated, are stated below:

(a) Distinction between personal and business income:- Since the final statements of
         account are intended to show the profitability of the business and not that of its
         proprietors, it is essential that all personal income and expenditure should be
         separated from business income and expenditure.

(b) Distinction between capital and revenue expenditure:- A distinction should be
         made between capital and revenue, both receipts and expenditure. Different types of
         income and expenditure should be classified under separate heads. Assets should be
         included in the Balance Sheet by following accounting principles and accounting
         standards. Likewise, a provision for expenses which have accrued but not paid, should
         be made by estimation or otherwise on the same basis as in the previous year.

(c) All material information to be disclosed:- Every information, considered material for
         evaluating the performance of the business or its financial position, should be
         disclosed. For example, when the labour charges have increased substantially on
         account of bonus having been paid to workmen, the amount of bonus paid should be
         disclosed. Similarly, If there are substantial write-offs in inventory due to any reason, it
         should be shown separately.

(d) Record only current period transactions:- Though the record of transactions should
         be maintained continuously, at the end of each accounting period, the transactions of
         the closing accounting period should be cut off from those of the succeeding period.

(e) Only transactions completed before close of accounts should be given effect:- It
         should be seen that only the effect of transactions, which were concluded before the
         close of period of account, has been adjusted in the accounts of the year. For example,
         when a sale of goods is to take place only after the goods have been inspected by the
         purchaser and the inspection had not been made before the close of the year, it would
         be incorrect to treat the goods as a sale in the accounts of the year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                                7.5

                          SOLE PROPRIETORS

Inter-relationship of the two statements

One of the points to be remembered is that of total expenditure incurred some type of
expenditure appears in the Profit and Loss Account and some in the Balance Sheet. Consider
few examples,

1.  Salaries paid for current year is shown on the Dr. side of Profit and Loss Account but

    outstanding salaries is shown on liabilities side of Balance Sheet and is added to

    Salaries paid and shown under Profit and Loss Account.

                                                   Profit & Loss A/c

    Particulars                                                 Amount Particulars             Amount
                                                                          `                              `
    To Salaries paid
    Add: Outstanding       25,000                                 26,500
                          1,500
           Salaries

    Liabilities                                    Balance Sheet                               Amount
    Outstanding Salaries                                                                                 `
                                                                Amount Assets
                                                                           `

                                                                     1,500

2.  When a machine is purchased, that part of it which is attributable to the year

    considered as depreciation is debited to the Profit and Loss Account and the balance

    amount after reducing the amount of depreciation is shown in the Balance Sheet as an

    asset.

                                                   Profit & Loss A/c

    Particulars                                                 Amount Particulars             Amount
    To Depreciation                                                       `                              `

                                                                  50,000

                                                   Balance Sheet

    Liabilities                                    Amount       Assets                         Amount
                                                             `                                           `
                                                                Fixed Assets
                                                                Less:- Depreciation  5,00,000  4,50,000
                                                                                     (50,000)

These illustrations show that the two statements, the Profit and Loss Account and the Balance
Sheet, are thoroughly inter-related. The assets shown in the Balance Sheet are mostly only the
remainder of the expenditure incurred after a suitable amount has been charged to the Profit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.6.6  ACCOUNTING

and Loss Account or the Trading Account. For preparing the two statements properly, it is of
the greatest importance that the amounts to be charged to the Profit and Loss Account should
be properly determined otherwise both statements will show an incorrect position. The
principle that governs this concept is called the Matching Principle.

Matching Principle

This principle demands that expenses incurred to earn the revenue should be properly
matched. This means the following:

(a) If a certain revenue and income is entered in the Trading / Profit and Loss Account all
         the expenses relating to it, whether or not payment has been actually made, should be
         debited to the Trading / Profit and Loss Account. This is why at the end of the year an
         entry is recorded to bring into account the outstanding expenses. That is also the
         reason why the opening inventory of goods is debited to the Trading Account since
         the relevant sale is credited in the same account.

(b) If some expense has been incurred but against it sale will take place in the next year
         or income will be received next year, the expense should not be debited to the current
         year's Profit and Loss Account but should be carried forward as an asset and shown in
         the Balance Sheet. It will be debited to the Profit and Loss Account only when the
         relevant income will also be credited. The same reason applies to depreciation of assets
         also. The part of the cost which is used to earn current year revenue is debited in same
         year.

(c) If an income or revenue is received in the current year but the work against it has to
         be done and the cost in respect of it has to be incurred next year, i.e. income received
         in advance, such income or the revenue is considered to be of next year. It should be
         shown in the Balance Sheet on the liabilities side as "income received in advance" and
         should be credited to the Profit and Loss Account of the next year. E.g. Newspapers or
         magazines usually receive subscriptions in advance for a year. The part of subscription
         that covers copies to be supplied in the next year is treated as income received in
         advance.

An exception

There appears to be one exception to the rule that only such costs as have yielded or is
expected to yield revenue should only be debited to Profit and Loss Account. For example, if
a fire has occurred and has damaged the firm's property the loss must be debited to the Profit
and Loss Account to the extent it is not covered by insurance. A loss, resulting from the fall of
selling price below the cost or from some debts turning bad, must similarly be debited to the
Profit and Loss Account. If this is not done the profit will be over-stated.

(NOTE: - The relevant entries and adjustments regarding the above three items are discussed
in detail later in this unit.)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                     7.7

                           SOLE PROPRIETORS

1.3 TRADING ACCOUNT

At the end of the year, as has been seen above, it is necessary to ascertain the net profit or
the net loss. For this purpose, it is first necessary to know the gross profit or gross loss. Gross
Profit is the difference between the selling price and the cost of the goods sold. For a trading
firm, the cost of goods sold can be ascertained by adjusting the cost of goods still on hand at
the end of the year against the purchases. It is done as follow:-

Opening Stock                                           ***

Add:- Purchases (Net)                                   **

Add:- Direct Expenses                                   **

                                                        ***

Less:- Cost of Goods Sold                               (**)

Closing Stock                                           ***

Suppose, in the first year, the net purchases (that is after deducting returns) total `1,00,000
and that `15,000 worth of goods (at cost) were not sold at the end of the year. The cost of the
goods sold will then be ` 85,000. If in the next year purchases are `1,50,000, direct expenses
are `10,000 and the cost of goods sold is ` 1,45,000 the closing stock will be ` 30,000
calculated as follows:

                                                                                `

Cost of unsold goods at the beginning of the year                                 15,000
Purchases during the year                                                       1,50,000
Direct Expenses
                                                                                  10,000
Less: Cost of sold goods during the year                                        1,75,000
Closing Stock                                                                   1,45,000
                                                                                (30,000)

Gross profit is usually ascertained by preparing a Trading account. The format of Trading
Account can be shown as below:-

                               Trading Account of.....for the year ended.....

                                                        `                       `

To Opening Stock                                        XXX By Sales            XXX XXX
To Purchases
Less: Returns outwards                             XXX        Less: Returns Inwards XXX XXX
To Direct expenses:
                                                   XXX  XXX By Closing Stock

                                                        XXX By Gross Loss c/d*

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       17.8.8          ACCOUNTING

Freight & Carriage                                      XXX

Customs & Insurance                                XXX

Wages                                              XXX

Gas, Water & Fuel                                  XXX

Factory Expenses                                   XXX

Royalty on production                              XXX  XXX

                                                        XXX                             XXX

To Gross Profit c/d*
*Only one will appear

If in the above example net sales, i.e., after adjustment for sales returns, is ` 2,00,000 then the
gross profit will be ` 55,000, i.e., `2,00,000 ­ ` 1,45,000. This profit is called gross profit since
from it indirect expenses have still to be deducted for knowing the net profit. Now, for the
same example Trading account will appear as follows:-

                       Trading Account for the year ending

                                                        `                                        `
                                                                                        2,00,000
To Opening Inventory                                      15,000  By Sales Account
To Purchase Account                                     1,50,000  By Closing Inventory    30,000
To Direct Expenses
To Gross Profit carried to P & L A/c                      10,000                        2,30,000

                                                        55,000

                                                        2,30,000

Point to Remember:-

 The opening inventory and purchases are written on the debt side.

 Sales and the closing inventory are entered on the credit side.

 If there are any direct expenses then they should also be written on the debit side of
       the Trading account.

 If the balances of credit side is more, the difference is written on the debit side as
       gross profit. This amount will also be carried forward to the Profit and Loss Account
       on the credit side.

 In case of gross loss, i.e., when the debit side of the Trading Account exceeds the
       credit side, the amount will be written on the credit side of the Trading Account and
       transferred to the debit side of the Profit and Loss Account.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                            7.9

                         SOLE PROPRIETORS

Trading Account Items

In a trading firm like a wholesaler, the main business consists of buying and selling the same
goods. In addition to the amount of the opening inventory, the trading account will also be
debited with all expenses incurred in bringing the goods to the godown of the firm (i.e. to the
present condition and location) and in making them ready for sale.

For example, freight paid on purchases, cartage, octroi, etc. will all be debited to the Trading
Account. The rule is that this account will be debited with all expenses incurred in bringing
the goods to their present location and condition.

We shall now consider individual items:

(1) Opening Inventory: Since this was closing inventory of the last year, it must have been
         entered in the opening inventory account, through the opening entry. Therefore, it will
         be found in the trial balance. This item is usually put as the first item on the debit side
         of the Trading Account. Of course, in the first year of a business there will be no
         opening inventory.

Trading A/c                                        Dr.

To Opening Stock A/c

(2) Purchases and Purchase Returns: The purchases account will have debit balance,
         showing the gross amount of purchases made of the materials. The purchase returns
         account will have credit balance showing the return of materials to the supplier. On
         the debit side of the trading account the net amount is shown as indicated (with
         assumed figures) :

                                                                  `

To Purchases                                                      3,00,000
Less : Purchase Returns                                           (10,000)
                                                                  2,90,000

Closing entry for this purpose is follows:

Purchases Return A/c                                    Dr.

To Purchases A/c

(This Net Purchases is transferred to Trading account)

Trading a/c                                             Dr.

To Purchase a/c

It happens sometimes that goods are received but the relevant invoice is not received
from the supplier. On the date of the closing of the account, an entry must be passed
to debit the purchases account and credit the supplier with the cost of goods.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.1.100         ACCOUNTING

(3) Carriage or Freight Inwards/Freight: This item should also be debited to the Trading
         Account, as it is incurred to bring the materials to the firm's godown and make them
         available for use. However, if any freight or cartage is paid on any asset, like machinery,
         it should be added to the cost of the asset and not debited to the Trading Account.

Trading a/c                                        Dr.

To Carriage or Freight Inwards

(4) Wages: Wages paid to workers in the godown/stores, should be debited to the Trading
         Account. If any amount is outstanding, it must be brought into books so that full wages
         for the period concerned are charged to the Trading Account. However, if wages are
         paid for installation of a fixed asset, it should be added to the cost of the asset.

Trading a/c                                             Dr.

To Wages

(5) Sales and Sales Returns: The sales account will have a credit balance indicating the
         total sales made during the year. The sales return account will have a debit balance,
         showing the total amount of goods returned by customer The net of the two amounts
         is entered on the credit side of the Trading Account.

Sales A/c                                               Dr.

To Sales return

To Trading A/c

Sometimes, goods are sold on approval basis that is when the customer has the right
to return the goods with in stipulated period in that case the sale entry should be
reversed. It is discussed later in detail.

(6) Closing Inventory and its valuation: Usually there is no account to show the value of
         goods lying in the godown at the end of the year. However, to correctly ascertain the
         gross profit, the closing Inventories must be properly taken and valued.

The entry is

Closing Inventory Account                                    Dr.

To Trading Account

Alternatively, Closing Inventory can be adjusted with purchases :

Closing Inventory Account                                    Dr.

                   To Purchases Account
The effect of this entry is to reduce the debit in the Purchases Account. The closing inventory
is also shown in balance sheet on Assets side.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                        7.11

                           SOLE PROPRIETORS

If Closing Stock appears in the Trial balance:-

The closing inventory is then not entered in the trading account, it is shown only in the
balance sheet. This is because it has already been adjusted to arrive at Cost of Goods Sold.

To ascertain value of the closing inventory, it is necessary to make a complete inventory or
list of all the items in the godown together with quantities. Of course, damaged or obsolete
items are separately listed. To the list of finished goods, one should also add the goods lying
with agents sent to them on consignment basis and also the goods sent on approval to
customer.

The valuation principle is cost or net realisable value whichever is lower.

Taking inventory is quite a lengthy process. Strictly, immediately at the end of the year the
taking of inventory should be completed. Sometimes, however this is done either a few weeks
before or a few weeks after the closing. In such a case the value of the inventory thus taken
must be adjusted to relate it to the closing date. The adjustment will be necessary because, in
the meantime, purchases and sales must have been made. The main point to remember is that
in respect of sales their cost has been established. Cost will be sales less gross profit.

Below is the summary for all transfer / closing entries to Trading a/c:

(1) Trading Account                                     Dr.

To Opening Inventory Account

To Purchases Account

To Wages Account

To Freight on Purchases Account, etc.

(2) Sales Account                                  Dr.

Closing Inventory Account                          Dr.

To Trading Account

At this stage Trading Account will reveal the gross profit, if the credit side is more, or
gross loss if the credit side is less. The gross profit will be transferred to the Profit and
Loss Account by the entry:

Trading Account                                         Dr.

To Profit and Loss Account

The entry for gross loss, if there be any is :

Profit and Loss Account                                 Dr.

To Trading Account

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          17.1.122          ACCOUNTING

ILLUSTRATION 1

Trial Balance for the financial year (FY) ended 31st March 2022 of M/s Deepakshi shows
following details:

    Particulars                                             Debit (`)           Credit (`)
    Purchase & Sales                                        10,00,000           12,00,000
    Debtors & Creditors
    Opening Stock                                            5,00,000             4,00,000
                                                             2,00,000

    Closing Stock                                           3,00,000

    Other Expenses & Incomes                                 7,00,000            9,00,000
    Fixed Assets & Long Term Liabilities                    25,00,000            6,00,000
    Capital                                                                     21,00,000

                                                            52,00,000 52,00,000

Additional Information: Creditors balance as on 1st April, 2021 is ` 3,00,000.

You are required to calculate cost of goods sold and amount paid to creditors during the year.

SOLUTION

i)  Calculation of Cost of Goods sold:

    Particulars                                                                 `

    Opening Stock                                                               2,00,000

    Add: Purchases (Closing stock already adjusted)*                            10,00,000

    Cost of Goods Sold                                                          12,00,000

    *Since, closing stock appears in Trial Balance, it means following entry has already been
    passed in books:

    Closing Stock A/c                                  Dr.  3,00,000

          To Purchases A/c                                  3,00,000

    So, we can see purchases have already been reduced by the amount of unsold stock,
    therefore no more adjustment needs to be made on account of closing stock for
    computing Cost of goods sold (COGS).

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                             7.13
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

ii) Calculation of amount paid to creditors:

Date     Particulars                                          ` Date Particulars               `
31.3.22                                            12,00,000 1.4.21 By Balance b/d   3,00,000
         To Bank A/c
31.3.22  (Balancing Figure)                        4,00,000   By Purchases          13,00,000
         To Balance c/d                                       A/c (Note:1)

                                                   16,00,000                        16,00,000

Note: 1) Purchases made during the year can be computed as:                                    `

   Particulars                                                                      10,00,000
   Purchases as per Trial Balance                                                    3,00,000
   Add: Closing Stock already adjusted
   Purchases made during the year                                                   13,00,000

Students may note that in case Closing Stock is not mentioned in Trial Balance, then
it means Opening Stock and Purchases appearing in Trial Balance include the value
of unsold stock. Since, we prepare our financial statements using matching concept
such unsold stock should not form part of cost and therefore is deducted.
Therefore, in this case to compute Cost of goods sold (COGS) we will have to use:

COGS = Opening Stock +Purchases ­ Closing Stock ­ Purchase Returns

ILLUSTRATION 2                                                                                 `
                                                                                     1,00,000
 Opening Inventory                                                                   6,72,000
 Purchases
 Carriage Inwards                                                                       30,000
 Wages                                                                                  50,000
 Sales                                                                              11,00,000
 Returns inward                                                                      1,00,000
 Returns outward                                                                        72,000
 Closing Inventory                                                                   2,00,000

Required

From the above information, prepare a Trading Account of M/s. ABC Traders for the year ended
31st March, 2022 and Pass necessary closing entries in the journal proper of M/s. ABC Traders

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          17.1.144        ACCOUNTING

SOLUTION

                       In the books of M/s. ABC Traders

          Trading Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars                      `                 Amount Particulars                              `   Amount
                       6,72,000                              `                         11,00,000                 `
To Opening Inventory   (72,000)                                                        (1,00,000)
To Purchases                                       1,00,000 By Sales                                  10,00,000
                                                                       Less : Returns                  2,00,000
   Less: Returns                                                       Inward
          outward
                                                   6,00,000 By Closing Inventory
To Carriage Inwards
To Wages                                             30,000
To Gross profit                                      50,000
(Balancing Figure)                                 4,20,000

                                                   12,00,000                                          12,00,000

          Journal Proper in the Books of M/s. ABC Traders (Closing entries)

Date Particulars                                                                        Amount         Amount
                                                                                                  `              `
2022
                                                                                           72,000         72,000
Mar. 31 Returns outward A/c                                   Dr.
                                                                                        1,00,000       1,00,000
          To Purchases A/c
                                                                                       10,00,000      10,00,000
          (Being the transfer of returns to purchases
          account)                                                                      7,80,000       1,00,000
                                                                                                       6,00,000
          Sales A/c                                           Dr.

          To Returns Inward A/c

          (Being the transfer of returns to sales account)

          Sales A/c                                           Dr.

          To Trading A/c

          (Being the transfer of balance of sales account to
          trading account)

          Trading A/c                                         Dr.

          To Opening Inventory A/c

          To Purchases A/c

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                       7.15
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

To Wages A/c                                                        50,000
                                                                    30,000
To Carriage Inwards A/c
                                                                  2,00,000
(Being the transfer of balances of opening
Inventory, purchases and wages accounts)                          4,20,000
                                                                  4,20,000
Closing Inventory A/c                              Dr.  2,00,000
                                                        4,20,000
To Trading A/c                                          4,20,000

(Being the incorporation of value of closing
Inventory)

Trading A/c                                        Dr.

To Gross Profit

(Being the amount of gross profit)

Gross profit                                       Dr.

To Profit and Loss A/c

(Being the transfer of gross profit to Profit and
Loss Account)

      1.4 PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT

The Profit and Loss Account starts with gross profit on the credit side. If there is gross loss, it
will be written on the debit side. After that all those expenses and losses, which have not been
entered in the Trading Account, will be written on the debit side of Profit and Loss Account.
Incomes and gains, other than sales, will be written on the credit side.

If we understand word `expenses' properly, there should be no difficulty in distinguishing
between items that will be debited to the Profit and Loss Account and those that will be shown
as Assets in the balance sheet. Further, it may be noted that the expenses which are personal
in nature will not be charged to Profit and Loss A/c. Only those revenue expenses and losses
which are related to the current year, are debited to Profit and Loss Account.

It is desirable, according to modern thinking that the Profit and Loss Account should be
prepared in such a manner as will enable the reader to form a correct idea about the profit
earned or loss incurred by the firm during the period together with the significant factor. Too
many details will prevent a person from knowing properly the factors leading to the profit
earned. Therefore, items should be according to the various functions, such as administrations,
selling and financing. The profit/loss A/c appears as follows:-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     17.1.166  ACCOUNTING

Dr.            Profit and Loss Account for the year ended                               Cr.

Particulars                                        ` Particulars                        `
To Gross Loss b/d
Management expenses                                By Gross Profit b/d
To Salaries (administrative)
To Office rent, rates and taxes                    Other Income
To Printing and stationery
To Telephone charges                               By Discount Received
To Postage
To Insurance                                       By Commission Received

To Audit Fees                                      Non-trading Income
To Legal Charges
To Electricity Charges                             By Bank Interest
Maintenance expenses
To Repairs & renewals                              By Rent of property let-out

To Depreciation on:                                By Dividend from investment in
         Office Equipment                          shares
         Office Furniture
         Office Buildings                          Abnormal Gains

Selling and Distribution expenses                  By Profit on sale of machinery
To Salaries (selling staff)
To Advertisement                                   By Profit on sale of investment
To Godown rent
To Carriage Outward                                By Net Loss (transferred to capital
To Bad Debts                                       A/c)
To Provision for bad debts
To Selling commission

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                       7.17
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

Financial expenses
To Bank charges
To Interest on loans
To Discount on bills
To Discount allowed to customers
Abnormal Losses
To Loss on sale of machinery
To Loss on sale of investment
To Loss by fire
To Net Profit (transferred to Capital A/c)

Note:

(i) Gross loss appears in the debit side of the Profit and Loss Account at the top; while
         Gross Profit on the credit side.

(ii) Net loss appears in the credit side of the Profit and Loss Account; while Net profit on
         debit side as balancing figures.

It will be good idea to either show these expenses in a separate schedule or to indicate the
total of these prominently in the Profit and Loss Account. This rule should be followed
wherever the number of items is rather large.

Closing Entries

The entries that have to be made in the journal for preparing the Trading and the Profit and
Loss Account that is for transferring the various accounts to these two accounts are known as
closing entries. We have already seen the entries required for preparing the Trading Account
and for transferring the gross profit to the profit and Loss Account. Now to complete the
Profit and Loss Account, the under mentioned three entries will be necessary.

(a) For items to be debited to the Profit and Loss Account this account will be debited and
         the various accounts concerned will be credited. For example,

Profit and Loss Account                            Dr.

To Salaries Account

To Rent Account

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.1.188                 ACCOUNTING

To Interest Account

To Other Expenses Account

(b) Items of income or gain such as interest received or miscellaneous income will be
         credited to Profit and Loss Account.

Discount Received Account                          Dr.

Bad debts Recovered Account                        Dr.

To Profit and Loss Account

(c) At this stage, the Profit and Loss Account will show net profit or net loss. Both have to
         be transferred to the Capital Account.

In case of net profit, i.e., when the credit side is bigger than the debit side, the entry is:

Profit and Loss Account                            Dr.

To Capital Account

In the case of net loss, the entry will be

Capital Account                                    Dr.

To Profit and Loss Account

Entries in detail

There may be other income such as interest received, discount received, rent from subletting
of premises, miscellaneous incomes such as from sale of junk material etc., It would be
desirable to show the totals only under each of the main categories of income. However,
interest on fixed deposits, interests or income from investments and other interest should be
shown separately. Similarly, items which have to be debited/credited to the proprietor should
be segregated from other items. Examples would be interest charged on drawings, interest
allowed on capital and charges for services rendered by the firm to the proprietor personally.

We shall now consider a few items individually:

(i) Drawings: Drawings are not expenses for the firm but reduction of capital and
         therefore should not be debited to the Profit and Loss Account but to Capital account
         of the proprietor.

Capital A/c                                             Dr.

To Drawings

If the proprietor has enjoyed some benefit personally, like use of the firm's car, a
suitable amount should be treated as drawing and to that extent the charge to the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                       7.19
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

Profit and Loss Account will be reduced, Drawings are debited to the proprietor's
capital account.

(ii) Income Tax: In case of companies, the income tax payable is treated like other
         expenses. But in the case of sole proprietorship, income tax is treated as a personal
         expense. It is debited to the Capital Account and not to the Profit and Loss Account.

Capital A/c                                        Dr.

To Income Tax A/c

This is because the amount of the tax will depend on the total income of the partners
or proprietor besides the profit of the firm. In case of partnership business, firm's tax
liability is to be debited to profit and loss account of the firm but partners' tax liability
are not to be borne by the firm. Therefore if the firm pays income tax on behalf of
partners, such payment of personal income tax should be treated as drawings.

(iii) Discount received and allowed: We have already seen that discount is of two types.
         Trade discount and Cash discount. Trade discount is allowed when the order for goods
         is not below a certain figure. It is deducted from the invoice. Only the net amount of
         invoice is entered in books. There is no further treatment of the trade discount. Cash
         discount is allowed to a customer if he makes the payment before a certain date. It is
         allowance made to him for prompt payment and is recorded in the books. Therefore,
         Trade discount is not debited to P/L account because it is already adjusted in sales, but
         cash discount is debited to P/L account.

Discount received is a gain and is credited to the Profit and Loss Account while
discount allowed is a loss and debited to Profit and Loss Account.

Profit/Loss A/c                                    Dr.

To Discount Allowed A/c

Discount Received A/c                              Dr.

To Profit/Loss A/c

(iv) Rebate: It is the allowance given to a customer when his purchases during a period,
         say one year, total upto a certain figure. Suppose a firm allows a rebate of 4% to those
         customers whose purchases during the year are at least ` 5,000. One Customer's
         purchases are ` 4,500, he will not get any rebate. Another customer's purchases total
         ` 5,100, he will get a rebate of ` 204. The entry for rebate is made only at the end of
         the year. The Rebate Account is debited and is later written in the profit and Loss
         Account on the debit side. Various customers who have earned the rebate are credited.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.2.200             ACCOUNTING

Initially when Rebate is given

Rebate A/c                                         Dr.

To Customer A/c

At the year end closing entry

Profit/Loss A/c                                    Dr.

To Rebate A/c

(v) Bad Debts: When a customer does not pay the amount due from him and all hopes of
         recovering the amount are lost, it is said to be a bad debt. It is a loss to the firm.
         Therefore, the bad debts account is debited, which is later on transferred in the Profit
         and Loss Account on the debit side. Since it is no use showing the amount due still as
         an asset, the account of the customer concerned is closed by being credited. The entry

Bad Debts Account                                  Dr.

To Debtor's / Customer (by name) Account

Profit/Loss Account                                Dr.

To Bad Debts A/c

In case the Provision for Bad debts has already been prepared then bad debts should
be written off first from it. Entry for it will be:

*Provision for Bad Debts A/c                            Dr.

To Bad Debts A/c

If later on, the amount is recovered, it should be treated as a gain. It should not be
credited to the party paying it. It should be credited to Bad Debts Recovered Account.
It will be entered in the Profit and Loss Account on the credit side.

Bad Debts Recovered Account                        Dr.

To Profit/Loss Account

For detailed understanding of Provision of Bad Debts please refer Point (6) topic
Adjustments of Provision of Bad and Doubtful Debts .

ILLUSTRATION 3

Revenue, Expenses and Gross Profit Balances of M/s ABC Traders for the year ended on 31st
March 2022 were as follows:

Gross Profit ` 4,20,000, Salaries ` 1,10,000, Discount (Cr.), ` 18,000, Discount (Dr.) ` 19,000, Bad
Debts ` 17,000, Depreciation ` 65,000, Legal Charges ` 25,000, Consultancy Fees ` 32,000, Audit
Fees ` 1,000, Electricity Charges `17,000, Telephone, Postage and Telegrams ` 12,000,
Stationery ` 27,000, Interest paid on Loans ` 70,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                 7.21
                                          SOLE PROPRIETORS

Required

Prepare Profit and Loss Account of M/s ABC Traders for the year ended on 31st March, 2022.
Show necessary closing entries in the Journal Proper of M/s. ABC Traders also.
SOLUTION

                                       In the Books of M/s. ABC Traders
                   Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                Amount
                                                             `                                 `
To Salaries
To Legal Charges                                   1,10,000 By Gross Profit          4,20,000
To Consultancy Fees                                  25,000 By Discount received       18,000
To Audit Fees                                        32,000
To Electricity Charges                                 1,000                         4,38,000
To Telephone, Postage &Telegrams                     17,000
To Stationery                                        12,000
To Depreciation                                      27,000
To Discount Allowed                                  65,000
To Bad Debts                                         19,000
To Interest                                          17,000
To Net Profit (b/f)                                  70,000
                                                     43,000

                                                   4,38,000

          Journal Proper in the Books of M/s. ABC Traders (Closing Entries)

Date      Particulars                                       Amount Amount

2022                                                                              `  `

March 31 Profit & Loss Account                              Dr. 3,95,000
                                                                                     1,10,000
          To Salaries A/c                                                               25,000
                                                                                        32,000
          To Legal Charges A/c                                                           1,000

          To Consultancy Fees A/c

          To Audit Fees A/c

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.2.222           ACCOUNTING

To Electricity Charges A/c                                            17,000
                                                                      12,000
To Telephone, Postage & Telegrams A/c                                 27,000
                                                                      65,000
To Stationery A/c                                                     19,000
                                                                      17,000
To Depreciation A/c                                                   70,000

To Discount Allowed A/c                                               18,000

To Bad Debts A/c                                                    4,20,000

To Interest A/c                                                       43,000

(Being the transfer of balances of various expenses                   43,000
accounts)

Discount Received A/c                                Dr.    18,000
                                                          4,20,000
To Profit & Loss A/c
                                                            43,000
(Being the transfer of discount received account            43,000
balance)

Gross Profit A/c                                     Dr.

To Profit & Loss A/c

(Being the transfer of gross profit from Trading
Account)

Profit & Loss A/c                                    Dr.

To Net Profit A/c

(Being the ascertainment of net profit)

Net Profit A/c                                       Dr.

To Capital A/c

(Being the transfer of net profit to Capital A/c)

Adjustments

The fundamental principle of accounting is that the period to which various items of income
and expenditure pertain should be co-extensive with the period of account. As such before
final accounts are drawn up, it must be ensured that the accounts which require adjustment
on this consideration have been adjusted, both by providing for expense accrued and
including income outstanding and excluding expenses the benefit of which extends beyond
the year of account as well as the income received in advance. The entries that must be passed
for adjusting various accounts of income and expenditure are shown below:

(1) Expenses accrued and accruing, e.g., Rent, Interest, Local Taxes, Wages etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                                   7.23
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

Appropriate Expense Account                                                         Dr.

To Expenses Accrued/outstanding Account

For Example, if Rent Paid is ` 50,000 for a year and Outstanding Rent is ` 14,000. It will
be treated as follows:-

                       Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                         Amount
                                                             `                                          `
To Rent paid
Add: Outstanding Rent  50,000                        64,000
                       14,000

                                                   Balance Sheet

Liabilities                                        Amount Assets                              Amount
Outstanding Rent                                             `                                          `

                                                     14,000

(2) Income accrued and accruing, e.g., Interest on Government Loans, Discounts on Bill,
         Professional fees, Rents and Premiums on leases, etc.

Interest/Fees etc. Accruing Account                Dr.

To Appropriate Income Account

Suppose interest received is ` 1,50,000 and accrued interest for the same period is
` 45,000. It will be treated as follows:-

                       Profit/Loss Account

Particulars            Amount Particulars                                                     Amount
                                 `                                                                      `

                                                             By interest received   1,50,000  1,95,000
                                                             Add: Accrued Interest    45,000
                                                   Balance Sheet

Liabilities                                        Amount Assets                              Amount
                                                             `                                          `

                                                                 Accrued Interest                45,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.2.244              ACCOUNTING

Notes:

(1) The term "accrued" signifies that an amount has been incurred as expense or
earned as income, the due date of payment of which falls in the next accounting
period. If the due date of payment occurs in the current accounting period the term
used should be "outstanding" or "accrued and due".

(2) The expression accrued and accruing' signifies items which though not due for
payment but pertain to the period of account, a provision for which has been made.
Converse is the position so far as items of income are concerned.

(3) Carrying forward income received in advance e.g., Subscription in the case of a club
         or fees in case of professional person.

Appropriate Income Account                                                Dr.

To Income Received in Advance Account

For Example Subscription Received in advance is ` 70,000 and total subscription
received is ` 1,75,000.

                          Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                    Amount
                                                             `                                     `

                                                   By subscription received 1,75,000     1,05,000

                                                   Less: Advance               (70,000)

Liabilities                                        Balance Sheet                         Amount
                                                                                                   `
                                                           Amount Assets
                                                                     `

Advance Subscription                               70,000

(4) Carrying forward of payments made in advance e.g., Telephone, Rent, Insurance etc.,

Expenses Prepaid Account                           Dr.

To Appropriate Expenses Account

Suppose out of the total Rent of ` 50,000 paid, ` 14,000 pertains to the next year.

                          Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                    Amount
                                                             `                                     `
To Rent paid
Less: Prepaid Rent        50,000

                      (14,000)                     36,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                                      7.25
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

Liabilities                                        Balance Sheet                             Amount
                                                          Amount Assets                                `
                                                                     `
                                                                                               14,000
                                                                         Prepaid Rent

(5) Adjustment of Inventory of materials in hand, e.g., Stationery, Advertisement,
         Material, Manufacturing Stores, etc., the cost whereof already has been debited to
         expense account.

Inventory of Materials                                  Dr.

         To Appropriate Expenses Account

For Example, if opening stock of stationery is ` 15,000 and direct expenses on it is
` 1,700. It is also given outside the Trial Balance. Closing stock of stationery is ` 5,000.
The treatment is as follow:-

                         Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                        Amount
                                                             `                                         `
To Stationery:
Opening stock            15,000                      11,700
Add: Expenses             1,700
Less: Closing Stock
                         (5,000)

Liabilities                                        Balance Sheet                             Amount
                                                                                                      `
                                                         Amount Assets
                                                                  `                              5,000
                                                                        Closing Stock

Note: Next year in the beginning entries No. (1) to (5) should be reversed.

(6) Provision for Bad and doubtful Debts: When it is feared that some of the amount
         due from customers will not be collected it is prudent to recognise the expected loss
         by reducing the current year's profit and placing the amount to the credit of a special
         account called "Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts Account". The entry is;

Profit and Loss Account                            Dr.

To Provision for Bad and doubtful Debts Account

Note: The accounts of the customers concerned are not affected until the amount is
actually written off for which the entry is,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.2.266           ACCOUNTING

Bad Debts Account                                            Dr.

To Customer's A/c

Bad Debts when written off are debited to the provision in this respect where such a
provision exists or directly to the Profit and Loss Account the corresponding credit
being given (ultimately) to the trade receivable's account. If, on the other hand, a
provision is required to be created, the amount of provision is also debited to the Profit
and Loss Account. Where an examination problem requires that certain bad debts
should be written off and a provision for doubtful debts made, the amount of bad
debts to be written off should be first debited against the existing balance of the
provision and the resulting balance in the account afterwards should be raised to the
required figure. The method is illustrated below:

ILLUSTRATION 4

On 1st April 2021 provision for Doubtful Debts existed at ` 40,000. Trade receivables on

31.03.2022 were ` 15,00,000; bad debts totaled ` 1,00,000. It is required to write off the
bad debts and create a provision equal to 5% of the Trade receivables' balances.

Show how you would compute the amount debited to the Profit and Loss Account.
SOLUTION

PARTICULARS                                                                                    `
Opening Provision (Cr.)
Bad Debts written off (Dr.)                                                             40,000
Short Provision                                                                       1,00,000
Provision required (Dr.) (5% of `14,00,000)
Additional amount required for debit to the Profit and Loss Account (Dr.)               60,000
                                                                                        70,000
                                                                                      1,30,000

The account will appear as follows:

                   Provision for Doubtful Debts Account

                                                   `                                  `

March To Bad Debts                                 1,00,000 April 1, By Balance b/d   40,000
31, 2022                                                         2021

              To Balance c/d                       70,000 March By Profit and Loss 1,30,000
              (required)                                       31, 2022 A/c (Balancing
                                                                             Figure)

                                                   1,70,000                           1,70,000

                                                             April 1, By Balance b/d  70,000
                                                             2022

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                        7.27
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

(7) Provision for Discount: This provision is created in the same manner, discussed above
         but the amount of provision is required to be calculated after deducting the Provision
         for Bad Debts from the total trade receivables. This is because Provision for discount
         is created only on good debtors.

         For Example, if Trade Receivables is ` 5,20,000 and provision for doubtful debt is
         ` 1,20,000. You are required to create a 10% provision for discount on debtors.

                           Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars              Amount
                                                             `                               `
To Provision for Discount
(10% of 4,00,000)                                    40,000

                                                   Balance Sheet

Liabilities                Amount Assets                                           Amount
                                       `                                                     `

                                                   Debtors               5,20,000  3,60,000

                                                   Less:- Provision for

                                                   Doubtful debts (1,20,000)

                                                   Less:- Provision for

                                                   Discount              (40,000)

(8) Provision for Depreciation: It is made either by debiting Depreciation Account and
         crediting the Provision for depreciation account concerned and afterwards closing of
         the Depreciation Account by transfer to the Profit and Loss Account or by directly
         debiting the profit and loss Account and crediting provision for depreciation account
         and explaining the nature of adjustment by recording a detailed narration in the
         Journal.

Profit/Loss account                                                      Dr.

To Depreciation/Provision for depreciation.

The amount of depreciation is deducted from the concerned asset and is then shown
in the Balance sheet.

For Example if machinery Cost ` 15,00,000 and 10% depreciation is to be provided. The
treatment is as follow:-

Depreciation a/c                                   Dr. ` 1,50,000

To Provision for Depreciation a/c                                 ` 1,50,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.2.288             ACCOUNTING

Depreciation is now charged to P&L a/c as:

Profit/Loss account                                Dr. `1,50,000

To Depreciation                                                     ` 1,50,000

                     Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars             Amount
To Depreciation                                              `                              `

                                                   1,50,000

                                                   Balance Sheet

Liabilities          Amount                        Assets                          Amount
                                `                                                            `

                                                   Machinery           15,00,000  13,50,000

                                                   Less: Provision

                                                   for Depreciation (1,50,000)

(9) Other Provisions: Whenever it is expected that a loss, the amount of which is not
         certain will occur, the proper course is to create a provision for meeting the loss if and
         when it occur. This would be the case, for example, if proprietor expects that
         compensation will be paid for the late delivery of goods. The entry is to debit the Profit
         and Loss Account and credit an account suitably named.

         All accounts showing provisions may appear in the Balance Sheet on the liability side
         but it should be noted that:

         (i) The provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts and the Provision for Discount on
                   Trade receivables are deducted from the total book debts; and

         (ii) The provision for Depreciation is deducted from the cost of the assets
                   concerned.

(10) Transfers, involving correction of errors, are made by debit or credit to the accounts
         affected, the corresponding effect being recorded either in a Suspense Account of
         some other account.

         Transfers in respect of special charges to the Profit and Loss Account e.g., partner's
         salaries, interest, etc., and in respect of appropriation of profits are recorded by debit
         to the Profit and Loss Account and credit to the parties concerned.

         While making adjustments, it is important to remember that every entry has a two-fold
         aspect, debit and credit. For example, if an adjustment is required to be made on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                 7.29
                                     SOLE PROPRIETORS

account of prepaid insurance charges, the Insurance Charges Account would be
credited, and, to complete the double entry, Prepaid Expenses Account is debited with
the same amount. The last mentioned balance would be included on the debit side of
the Trial Balance.

Students should, as a matter of course, record on the rough working sheets,
adjustments in respect of various items stated in a question and then give their effect
in the Trial Balance, before proceeding to draw up the Final Accounts.

1.5 CERTAIN ADJUSTMENTS AND THEIR

TREATMENTS

1. Abnormal loss of Inventory by accident or fire: Sometimes loss of goods occurs due
         to fire, theft, etc. If due to accident or fire, a portion of Inventory is damaged, the value
         of loss is first to be ascertained. Thereafter, Abnormal Loss Account is to be debited
         and Purchase Account or Trading Account is to be credited.

Abnormal Loss Account is to be transferred to Profit & Loss Account. If amount of loss
is recoverable from insurance company, then insurance company is to be debited
instead of Profit & Loss Account. Till the money is not received from the insurance
company, Insurance Company's Account will be shown in the Assets side of the Balance
Sheet. If any part of the loss is recoverable from the insurance company, then the
portion not compensated by the insurance company should be debited to Profit &
Loss Account. For example, if goods worth ` 6,000 are destroyed by fire and the
insurance company admits the claim for ` 4,500, the Journal entries will be:-

(i)  Loss by Fire Account                              Dr. 6,000

     To Purchases/Trading Account                                      6,000

(ii) Insurance Company's A/c (Insurance Claim)         Dr. 4,500

     Profit & Loss A/c                                 Dr. 1,500

     To Loss by Fire A/c                                               6,000

                           Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars  Amount
                                                             `                   `
To Loss by Fire
(The amount not compensated by                         1,500
insurance company)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.3.300          ACCOUNTING

                                                   Balance Sheet

Liabilities                                        Amount Assets                        Amount
                                                             `                                    `

                                                                  Insurance Claim           4,500

In the Trading Account, Purchases will be reduced by 6,000.

2. Goods sent on Approval basis: Sometimes goods are sold to customers on sale or
         return basis or on approval basis. It should not be treated as actual sale till the time it
         is not approved by the customer. When goods were sold we have passed the entry for
         actual sales. Therefore, at the year end, if the goods are still lying with the customers
         for approval, following entries are to be passed:

For example -

Goods costing `10,000 sent to a customer on sale or return basis for `12,000. The entry
for such unapproved sale shall be-

(i) Sales A/c                                                     Dr. 12,000

              To Trade receivables A/c                                                  12,000

(i) Stock on approval A/c                                         Dr. 10,000

              To Trading A/c                                                            10,000

These goods should now be included in the amount of Closing Stock at their cost price.

3. Goods used other than for sale: Sometimes goods are used for some other purposes,
         such as distributed as free samples, used in construction of any assets or used by
         proprietor for personal use. In such cases the amount used for other purposes is
         subtracted from Purchases A/c and depending upon the specific use done, the suitable
         account head is debited.

For example:-

When goods are given away as donation-

Donation A/c                                                                       Dr.

To Purchases A/c

When goods are used by the proprietor for his personal use-

Drawings A/c                                                                       Dr.

To Purchases A/c

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                         7.31
                                    SOLE PROPRIETORS

    When goods are distributed as free samples :-

    Free Samples / Advertisement A/c                                                Dr.

    To Purchases A/c

    When goods are used in business for construction of Building or the Machinery :-

    Building A/c / Plant & Machinery A/c                                            Dr.

    To Purchases A/c

    When goods are used for maintenance of business premises/ Machinery: -

    Repair & Maintenance A/c                                                        Dr.

    To Purchases A/c

4.  Commission based on profit: Sometimes commission is payable to manager based

    on net profit; in such a case calculation is done as follows:

    (i) Commission on net profit before charging such commission =

    Profit  before       commission                x  Rate of commission
                                                                100

    (ii) Commission on net profit after charging such commission =

    Profit before commission                       x     Rate of commission
                                                      100+Rate of commission

    Commission is recorded by following journal entry

    Commission A/c                                                                  Dr.

    To Commission Payable A/c

    (Being commission payable to Mr ..... @ .....% on net profit after
    charging such commission, net profit before charging commission
    being `........)

    Commission will be debited in the Profit & Loss Account and
    Commission Payable Account will be shown in the Balance Sheet
    on liability side.

    Profit/Loss Account                                                             Dr.

    To Commission A/c

    For example if Net profit before Commission is ` 1,00,000 and Manager is entitled to
    a Commission of 10% of Net Profit before charging such commission. The amount of
    Commission is = ` 10,000 (10% of ` 1,00,000). It will be shown as follow:-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       17.3.322        ACCOUNTING

                       Profit/Loss Account

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                   Amount
                                                             `                                    `
To Commission
To Net Profit transferred to Capital A/c             10,000
                                                     90,000

Liabilities                                        Balance Sheet                        Amount
Commission Payable                                            Amount Assets                       `
                                                                         `

                                                                 10,000

Now, let us assume that 10% commission is payable on Net Profit after charging such
commission. The amount of commission now is = 9,090.90 or 9091 (approx) (` 1,00,000
x 10/110)

ILLUSTRATION 5

The following is the Trial Balance of C. Wanchoo on 31st March, 2022.

                   Trial Balance on 31st March , 2022

Particulars                                                                  `          `

Capital Account                                                                             10,00,000
Inventories as on 1st April,2021                                             2,00,000

Cash in hand                                                                 1,44,000

Machinery Account                                                            7,36,000

Purchases Account                                                            18,20,000

Wages Account                                                                10,00,000

Salaries Account                                                             10,00,000

Discount Allowed A/c                                                         50,000

Discount Received A/c                                                                   30,000

Sundry Office Expenses Account                                               6,00,000

Sales Account                                                                           50,00,000

Sums owing by customer (Trade receivables)                                   8,50,000

Trade payables (sums owing to suppliers)                                                3,70,000

Total                                                                        64,00,000 64,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                              7.33
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

Value of Closing Inventory on 31st March, 2022 was ` 2,70,000

Prepare closing entries for the above items and Prepare Trading and Profit and Loss
Account.

SOLUTION

Date      Particulars                                                `  `

2022

March 31 Trading Account                            Dr. 30,20,000

          To Inventory Account                                          2,00,000

          To Purchase A/c                                               18,20,000

          To Wages A/c                                                  10,00,000

          (Being the accounts in the Trial Balance
          which have to be transferred to the
          Trading Account debit side)

March 31 Sales Account                              Dr. 50,00,000

          To Trading A/c                                                50,00,000

          (Being the amount of Sales transferred
          to the credit of Trading Account)

March 31 Inventory (Closing) A/c                    Dr. 2,70,000

          To Trading A/c                                                2,70,000

          (Being the value of Inventory on hand
          on 31st March,2022)

March 31 Trading A/c                                Dr. 22,50,000

          To Profit and Loss A/c                                        22,50,000

          (Being the transfer of gross profit.)

March 31 Profit and Loss A/c                        Dr. 16,50,000

          To Discount Allowed Account                                   50,000

          To Salaries A/c                                               10,00,000

          To Sundry Office Expenses A/c                                 6,00,000

          (Being the various expense accounts
          transferred to the P & L Account)

March 31 Discount Received A/c                      Dr.        30,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.3.344  ACCOUNTING

                   To P & L Account                                                             30,000

                (Being the credit balance of discount            Dr. 6,30,000
                received transferred to Profit and Loss                                       6,30,000
                A/c)
                                                                       1,28,50,000 1,28,50,000
March 31 Profit and Loss A/c

                   To Capital A/c

                (Being the transfer to Net Profit to the
                Capital Account)

                                                   C. WANCHOO

Trading Account of the year ended March 31, 2022

Particulars                                                   `  Particulars                            `
To Inventory A/c                                                 By Sales A/c                50,00,000
To Purchases                                        2,00,000     By Inventory (Closing)
To Wages                                           18,20,000                                  2,70,000
To Gross profit transfered to P                    10,00,000
& L A/c                                            22,50,000                                 52,70,000

                                                   52,70,000

Profit and Loss Account for the year ended March 31, 2022

Particulars                                                   `  Particulars                            `
To Salaries                                        10,00,000     By Gross profit transfered
                                                                 from                        22,50,000
To Discount Allowed                                    50,000    the Trading Account             30,000
To Sundry Office Expenses                           6,00,000
To Net Profit transferred to                                        By Discount Received

    Capital A/c                                     6,30,000
                                                   22,80,000
                                                                                             22,80,000

      1.6 BALANCE SHEET

The balance sheet may be defined as "a statement which sets out the assets and liabilities of a
firm or an institution as at a certain date." Since even a single transaction will make a difference
to some of the assets or liabilities, the balance sheet is true only at a particular point of time.
That is the significance of the word "as at."

The assets are shown on the right hand side and liabilities and capital on the left hand side.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                  7.35
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

CHARACTERISTICS

The balance sheet has certain characteristics, which should be noted. These are the following:

(i) It is prepared at a particular date, rather the close of a day and not for a period. It is
         true only on that date and not later. Suppose, in the example given above, a part of
         the goods were sold on 1st April, 2021. This will mean that the value of the Inventory
         will be reduced, the cash in hand will increase and the capital account will be reduced
         or increased depending upon loss or profit on sale.

(ii) The balance sheet is prepared only after the preparation of the Profit and Loss Account.
         This is the reason why the Profit and Loss Account (including the Trading Account) and
         the Balance Sheet are together called Final Accounts (of course, the Balance Sheet is
         not an account, the two sides are not the debit and the credit sides.) Without being
         accompanied by the Profit and Loss Account, the Balance Sheet will not be able to
         throw adequate light on the financial position of the firm. For that purpose an
         appreciation of the profits of the firm is necessary.

(iii) Since capital always equals the difference between assets and liabilities and since the
         capital account will independently arrive at this figure, the two sides of the Balance
         Sheet must have the same totals. If it is not so, there is certainly an error somewhere.

In the illustration no. 5 worked out above it will be seen that the under mentioned accounts
have not been closed even after preparation of the Profit and Loss Account and the transfer
of the net profit to the capital account.

                                                                                                     `

Cash in Hand                                        1,44,000 Debit balance
Capital Accounts (` 10,00,000+ ` 6,30,000)         16,30,000 Credit balance
Machinery Account
Trade receivables                                   7,36,000 Debit balance
Trade payables                                      8,50,000 Debit balance
Inventories                                         3,70,000 Credit balance
                                                    2,70,000 Debit balance

Looking at these accounts, one would know that various assets: Cash balance in hand, cash at
bank, machinery, furniture etc. that the firm possesses and the amounts that are owing as
liability to trade payables and to the proprietor as capital. The capital, of course, will be the
difference between the total of assets and of liabilities. The assets, liabilities and capital are
usually presented in a statement called the Balance Sheet. This is given below for the accounts
mentioned above.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.3.366        ACCOUNTING

                               C. WANCHOO
                Balance Sheet as at March 31, 2022

Liabilities                                         Amount Assets                Amount
                                                              `                            `
Trade payables
Capital                                             3,70,000 Cash in Hand        1,44,000
                                                   16,30,000 Trade receivables   8,50,000
                                                                                 2,70,000
                                                                   Inventories   7,36,000
                                                                   Machinery    20,00,000
                                                   20,00,000

ARRANGEMENTS OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

(1) Assets: Assets may be grouped in one of the following two ways:

(i) Liquidity: Under this approach, the asset, which can be converted into cash
         first, is presented first. Those assets, which are most difficult in this respect, are
         presented at the bottom. As per Liquidity the balance sheet can be prepared as
         follow:-

                Balance Sheet as at...

Liabilities                                        Amount Assets                Amount
                                                             `                            `

Bills Payable                                      Cash in Hand
Trade Creditors                                    Cash at Bank
Loans                                              Government Securities
Outstanding Expenses                               Other Investments
Reserves & Surplus                                 Bills Receivable
Capital                                            Sundry Debtors
                                                   Stock
                                                   Furniture & Fixtures
                                                   Plant & Machinery
                                                   Land and Building

(ii) Permanence: Assets, which are to be used, for long term in the business and
         are not meant to be sold are presented first. Assets, which are most liquid, such
         as cash in hand, are presented at the bottom.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                  7.37
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

Balance Sheet as at...

Liabilities                                        Amount Assets                        Amount
                                                             `                                    `
Capital                                                          Land and Building
Reserves & Surplus                                               Plant & Machinery
Outstanding Expenses                                             Furniture & Fixtures
Loans                                                            Stock
Trade Creditors                                                  Sundry Debtors
Bills Payable                                                    Bills Receivable
                                                                 Other Investments
                                                                 Government Securities
                                                                 Cash at Bank
                                                                 Cash in Hand

                   Note:- Some of the assets may be capable of being sold easily like investment
                   in government securities or shares of some companies. They should be treated
                   as liquid or permanent according to the intention of the firm.

(2) Liabilities: Liabilities may also be shown according to the urgency with which payment
         has to be made. One way is to first show the capital, then long-term liabilities and last
         of all short term liabilities like amounts due to suppliers of goods or bills payable. The
         other way is to start with short-term liabilities and then show long term liabilities and
         last of all capital.

CLASSIFICATION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

Assets are basically of following types:

Current Assets: - these assets are meant to be converted into cash as quickly as possible.
Generally, within one year. For example:- Cash in hand, Cash at Bank, Trade receivables,
Inventories.

Long Term Assets: - Those that are meant to be used by the firm over a long period and not
sold the former type of assets is also called fixed assets. For example:- Machinery, Building,
Long term Investment.

Intangible Assets: - the assets which have no physical existence and cannot be seen or
touched are called as Intangible Assets. For example :- Patents, Copyrights etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.3.388  ACCOUNTING

It is desirable that in the balance sheet the two types of assets should be shown separately
and prominently. This would give meaningful and logical information.

Liabilities to outsider will be of two types:

Current Liabilities: - this liability must be settled in one year or less. It is also called as short-
term liability. For example: - Creditors, Bills Payable etc.

Long Term Liability: - those liabilities which exists for more than one year are Long term
liabilities. For example long term loans from banks. Of course, it will include undistributed
profits also.

Sole proprietors generally present Balance Sheet in a horizontal form with "Capital and
Liabilities" on the left hand side and `Assets' on the right-hand side. In the Balance Sheet the
various items should be grouped suitably as indicated below:

          Balance Sheet as at..............

Liabilities                                        Amount       Assets                    Amount
                                                             `                                      `
Capital A/c:                                                    Tangible Fixed Assets :
Balance                                                           Land and Building
                                                                  Plant and Machinery
  Add : Net Profit/Less: Net Loss                                 Furniture and Fixture
  Less : Drawings                                                 Vehicles
Long Term Loans :
  Term Loans                                                    Intangibles :
  Other Loans                                                     Goodwill
Short Term Loans :                                                Patent Rights
  Cash Credit                                                     Designs and Brand

  Overdrafts                                                    Names
  Other Loans                                                   Investments :
Current Liabilities :
  Trade payables                                                  Long term investments
  Outstanding Expenses                                          Current Assets :
  Advances Taken
Provision :                                                       Inventory in Trade
  Provision for Bad debts                                         Trade receivables
  Provision for Retirement Benefits                               Short term investments
  Provision for Taxation                                          Prepayments
                                                                  Advances
                                                                  Bank Balances
                                                                  Cash In Hand

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                               7.39
                                          SOLE PROPRIETORS

In course, there is no hard and fast rule regarding presentation of assets, liabilities and equities
in the Balance sheet. However, the model presentation shown above has been designed
considering the nature of Balance Sheet elements and categorizing them appropriately.

Proper presentation of Balance Sheet items improves understandability of the information
desired to be communicated to the users of account.

ILLUSTRATION 6

Given below Trial Balance of M/s Dayal Bros. as on 31st March, 2022 :

Particulars                                        Debit Balances Credit Balances

Capital A/c                                                 `                     `
Land and Building
14% Term Loan                                                                     7,00,000
Loan from M/s. D & Co.
Trade receivables                                           3,00,000
Cash in hand
Inventories in Trade                                                              4,00,000
Furniture
Trade payables                                                                    4,60,000
Advances to Suppliers
Net Profit                                                  4,20,000
Drawings
                                                               20,000

                                                            6,00,000

                                                            2,00,000

                                                                                     40,000

                                                            1,00,000

                                                                                  1,00,000

                                                               60,000

                                                            17,00,000             17,00,000

Required

Prepare Balance Sheet as on 31st March, 2022.
SOLUTION

                                        In the Books of M/s Dayal Bros.
                                    Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2022

Liabilities                      `                 Amount Assets                  Amount
Capital: Balances       7,00,000                             `                              `
                                                                 Land & Building
                                                                                  3,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.4.400                      ACCOUNTING

Add: Net Profit               1,00,000                             Furniture              2,00,000
                              8,00,000                             Inventories in Trade   6,00,000
Less: Drawings                (60,000)              7,40,000 Trade receivables            4,20,000
14% Term Loan (loan taken at                        4,00,000 Advances to Suppliers        1,00,000
year end)
Loan from M/s D & Co.                               4,60,000 Cash in Hand                    20,000
Trade payables                                         40,000
                                                                                         16,40,000
                                                   16,40,000

ILLUSTRATION 7
The balance sheet of Thapar on 1st April, 2021 was as follows:

Liabilities                    Amount Assets                                              Amount
                                         `                                                          `
Trade payables
Expenses Payable              15,00,000 Plant & Machinery                                30,00,000
Capital                        1,50,000 Furniture & Fixture                               3,00,000

                              50,00,000 Trade receivables                                14,00,000
                                              Cash at Bank                                6,50,000
                                              Inventories
                                                                                         13,00,000
                              66,50,000                                                  66,50,000

During 2021-22, his Profit and Loss Account revealed a net profit of ` 18,30,000. This was after
allowing for the following :
(a) Rent received from property let out ` 3,00,000.
(b) Depreciation on Plant and Machinery @ 10% and on Furniture and Fixtures @ 5%.
(c) A provision for Doubtful Debts @ 5% of the trade receivables as at 31st March, 2022.
But while preparing the Profit and Loss Account he had forgotten to provide for (1) outstanding
expenses totaling ` 1,80,000 and (2) prepaid insurance to the extent of ` 20,000.
His current assets and liabilities on 31st March, 2022 were: Inventories ` 14,50,000; Trade
receivables ` 20,00,000; Cash at Bank ` 10,35,000 and Trade payables ` 11,40,000.
During the year he withdrew ` 6,00,000 for domestic use.
Required
Draw up his Balance Sheet at the end of the year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                                  7.41
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

SOLUTION

                         Profit and Loss Account (Revised)

Particulars                                                   ` Particulars                              `
To Outstanding expenses                             1,80,000 By Balance b/d
To Net profit                                      16,70,000 By Prepaid insurance             18,30,000
                                                   18,50,000                                      20,000

                                                                                              18,50,000

                 Balance Sheet of Thapar as at 31st March, 2022

Liabilities                                        ` Assets                              `    `
Capital
Add: Net Profit  50,00,000                         Cash at Bank                               10,35,000

Less : Drawings  16,70,000                         Trade receivables               20,00,000
Outstanding
expenses         66,70,000                         Less: Provision for
Trade payables
                                                   doubtful debts (1,00,000) 19,00,000

                 (6,00,000) 60,70,000 Plant and Machinery 30,00,000

                                                   1,80,000 Less: Depreciation (3,00,000) 27,00,000

                            11,40,000 Furniture & Fixtures                         3,00,000
                                            Less: Depreciation                     (15,000) 2,85,000
                                            Inventories
                                            Prepaid insurance                                    14,50,000
                                                                                                     20,000
                            73,90 000
                                                                                                 73,90,000

      1.7 SEQUENCE OF ACCOUNTING PROCEDURE OR THE
      ACCOUNTING CYCLE

What has been done so far shows that the accounting process in the following order :
(i) recording the transactions in the journal or journalising;
(ii) preparing ledger accounts on the basis of the journal or posting into the ledger;
(iii) taking out the trial balance to check arithmetical accuracy;
(iv) preparing the trading and profit and loss account or the income statement for the

         period concerned; and
(v) preparing the balance sheet to show the financial position at the end of the period.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             17.4.422        ACCOUNTING

1.8 OPENING ENTRY

We have seen that on commencing a new business one debits the cash account and credits
the capital account with the amount introduced. A firm closes the books of account at the end
of each year and starts new books in the beginning of each year. The first entry in the journal
is to record the closing balances of various assets and liabilities at the end of the previous
year as the opening balances in the beginning of the new year. The balance sheet prepared
at the end of the year records these balances and is the basis for this first entry. It is called
the opening entry.

The assets shown in the balance sheet are debited and the liabilities and the capital account
credited.

ILLUSTRATION 8

                       Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2022

Liabilities                                        ` Assets                                     `

Mahendra & Sons                                    5,60,000 Cash in hand                        43,000

Capital                                            20,00,000 Cash at Bank                       2,67,500
                                                                   Trade receivables            7,49,500

                                                              Closing Inventory                 9,00,000

                                                              Machinery and Equipment           6,00,000

                                                   25,60,000                                    25,60,000

From the above given balance sheet prepare the relevant opening entry.
SOLUTION
The Opening Entry :01-04-2022

                                                                                       Dr.             Cr.
                                                                                         `               `

Cash A/c                                                                  Dr.         43,000    5,60,000

Bank A/c                                                                  Dr.         2,67,500
Trade receivables
Inventory A/c                                                             Dr.         7,49,500
Machinery and Equipment A/c
                                                                          Dr.         9,00,000

                                                                          Dr.         6,00,000

To Mahendra & Sons A/c

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                    7.43
                                      SOLE PROPRIETORS

      To Capital A/c                                                                        20,00,000
(Being the balances brought forward)                                       25,60,000 25,60,000

Posting the Opening Entry

All the assets show debit balance. Such accounts are opened and the relevant amounts written
on the debit side as "To Balance b/d". Following is the cash account arising from the entry
given above.

                                                      Cash Account

Date  Particulars       Amount Date                Particulars                   Amount
2022                              `                                                        `

April 1 To Balance b/d  43,000

Similarly account should be opened for all other assets and relevant amount should be posted
on the Dr. side.

The accounts of liabilities show credit balances. An account for each liability is opened and
the relevant account is written on the credit side as "By Balance b/d". This is shown below by
opening the accounts of Mahendra & Sons mentioned in the entry given above.

                                                  Mahendra & Sons

Date Particulars        Amount Date                Particulars                   Amount
                                  ` 2022                                                   `

                                                   April 1 To Balance b/d        5,60,000

By posting the opening entry completely all the accounts of assets and liabilities in the
beginning are opened. We illustrate below a complete cycle of journalising, posting and trial
balance.

Students should work through the following illustration given by way of practice on the
method of making adjustments in some of the accounts contained in a Trial Balance and
afterwards preparing the final Account.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             17.4.444  ACCOUNTING

ILLUSTRATION 9
Shri Mittal gives you the following Trial Balance and some other information:

                                    Trial Balances as on 31st March, 2022

Particulars                                                                    Dr.  Cr.

                                                                               `    `

Capital                                                                             8,70,000
Purchases and Sales
Opening Inventory                                  6,05,000 12,10,000
Trade receivables and Trade payables
14% Bank Loan (loan taken at year end)                                      72,000
Overdrafts (overdraft taken at year end)
Salaries                                                                    90,000 1,70,000
Advertisements
Other expenses                                                                      2,00,000
Returns
Furniture                                                                           1,12,000
Building
Cash in Hand                                       2,70,000
Input CGST
Input SGST                                         1,10,000
Output IGST
                                                                            60,000

                                                                            40,000 30,000

                                                   4,50,000

                                                   8,90,000

                                                                            2,000
                                                                            9,000
                                                                            9,000

                                                                                    15,000

                                                   26,07, 000 26,07,000

Closing Inventory on 31st March, 2022 was valued at ` 1,00,000.
Required
Prepare final accounts of Shri Mittal for the year ended 31st March, 2022.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                                     7.45
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

SOLUTION

                                    In the books of Shri Mittal
                 Trading Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars           6,05,000                      Amount Particulars                12,10,000    Amount
                      (30,000)                                `                         (40,000)             `
To Opening inventory
To Purchases                                           72,000 By Sales                            11,70,000
Less: Returns                                                      Less: Returns                   1,00,000
To Gross Profit
                                                    5,75,000 By Closing inventory
                                                    6,23,000                                      12,70,000
                                                   12,70,000

               Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars           Amount (`) Particulars                                                Amount (`)

To Salaries                                        2,70,000 By Gross profit                       6,23,000

To Advertisement                                   1,10,000

To Other expenses                                  60,000

To Net profit                                      1,83,000

                                                   6,23,000                                       6,23,000

                      Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2022

Liabilities                     Amount (`) Assets                                           Amount (`)
Capital                                                                                          8,90,000
Add: Net profit       8,70,000                                     Building                      4,50,000
14% Bank Loan         1,83,000                     10,53,000 Furniture                             90,000
Trade payables                                                                                   1,00,000
Overdrafts                                          2,00,000 Trade receivables                       2,000
                                                    1,70,000 Closing inventory                       3,000
                                                    1,12,000 Cash in hand
                                                                                               15,35,000
                                                                   Input SGST (W.N.)
                                                   15,35,000

Note: As loan and overdraft taken at year end so no interest shown.
Working Note:

Output IGST liability is paid by utilizing Input CGST of ` 9,000 and Input SGST of ` 6,000.
Thereafter, closing balance of Input SGST of ` 3,000 is reported in Balance Sheet.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          17.4.466  ACCOUNTING

ILLUSTRATION 10

Mr. Mohan gives you the following trial balance and some other information:

                    Trial Balance as on 31st March, 2022

   Particulars                                                               `  `
   Capital
   Sales                                                                        6,50,000
   Purchases
   Opening Inventory                                                            9,70,000
   Freights Inward
   Salaries                                               4,30,000
   Other Administration Expenses
   Furniture                                              1,10,000
   Trade receivables and Trade payables
   Returns                                                40,000
   Discounts
   Bad Debts                                              2,10,000
   Investments in Government Securities
   Cash in Hand and Cash at Bank                          1,50,000
   Input CGST
   Input SGST                                             3,50,000
   Output CGST
   Output SGST                                            2,10,000 1,90,000
   Output IGST
                                                          20,000 12,000
Other Information:
                                                          19,000                9,000

                                                          5,000

                                                          1,00,000

                                                          1,89,000
                                                            10,000
                                                            10,000

                                                                                8,000
                                                                                8,000
                                                                                6,000

                                                          18,53,000 18,53,000

(i) Closing Inventory was ` 1,80,000;

(ii) Depreciate Furniture @ 10% p.a.

Required

Prepare Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended on 31.3.2022 and Balance Sheet
of Mr. Mohan as on that date.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                             7.47
                                    SOLE PROPRIETORS

SOLUTION

                                    In the books of Mr. Mohan
                 Trading Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                       Amount
                                                             `                                        `

To         Opening                                 1,10,000 By Sales              9,70,000

Inventory

To Purchases         4,30,000                                Less: Returns        (20,000)  9,50,000
                                                                                            1,80,000
Less: Returns        (12,000) 4,18,000 By Closing Inventory

To Freight Inwards                                 40,000

To Gross profit                                    5,62,000

                               11,30,000                                                    11,30,000

             Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars                                        ` Particulars                                     `
                                                                                            5,62,000
To Depreciation                                    35,000 By Gross profit
                                                                                                9,000
To Salaries                                        2,10,000 By Discount received
                                                                                            5,71,000
To Administration expenses                         1,50,000

To Discount allowed                                19,000

To Bad debts                                       5,000

To Net profit                                      1,52,000

                                                   5,71,000

                     Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2022

Liabilities          6,50,000                      Amount Assets                  3,50,000  Amount
                     1,52,000                                `                    (35,000)            `
Capital                                                          Furniture
Add: Net profit                                                                             3,15,000
Trade payables                                     8,02,000 Less: Depreciation              1,80,000
Output IGST                                        1,90,000 Closing Inventory               2,10,000

                                                      2,000 Trade receivables

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             17.4.488         ACCOUNTING

                                                             Investment in Govt  1,00,000
                                                             Securities
                                                             Cash in Hand and    1,89,000
                                                             Cash at Bank        9,94,000

                                                   9,94,000

Working Note:

Summary of Output and Input GST liability (as per Trial Balance)

                       OUTPUT GST (`)                        INPUT GST (`)

IGST                   6,000

CGST                   8,000                                 10,000

SGST                   8,000                                 10,000

Output liability Tax Payable                                 Paid through ITC    Tax paid in cash
  (Tax head)                                                                                      2,000

                                                   IGST      CGST         SGST
                                                             2,000        2,000
IGST                   6,000                                 8,000
CGST                   8,000                                              8,000
SGST                   8,000

In the above solution, it is assumed that balance IGST liability of ` 2,000 (after utilising CGST
and SGST) is not paid off in cash.
ILLUSTRATION 11

The Balance Sheet of Mr. Popatlal, a merchant on 31st March, 2022 stood as below:

Liabilities                                        Amount Assets                 Amount

                                                   `                             `

Capital                                            2,40,000 Fixed Assets         1,25,600

Trade payables                                     1,64,000 Inventories          2,06,400

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                            7.49
                                          SOLE PROPRIETORS

Bank Overdraft                                     1,46,000 Trade receivables          1,88,000
                                                                 Less: Provision         (6,200)
                                                                 Cash                             1,81,800
                                                                                                    36,200
                                                   5,50,000
                                                                                                  5,50,000

Required

Show opening journal entry on 1st April, 2022 in the books of Mr. Popatlal.

SOLUTION

                                                   Opening entry

                                                                                       (Dr.) `    (Cr.) `

1.4.2022 Fixed Assets A/c                                                         Dr. 1,25,600
               Inventories A/c
               Trade receivables A/c                                              Dr. 2,06,400
               Cash A/c
               To Trade payables A/c                                              Dr. 1,88,000
               To Bank Overdraft A/c
               To Provision for Doubtful Debts A/c                                Dr.  36,200
               To Capital A/c
                                                                                                  1,64,000

                                                                                                  1,46,000

                                                                                                  6,200

                                                                                                  2,40,000

ILLUSTRATION 12

The following is the schedule of balances as on 31.3.22 extracted from the books of Shri
Gavaskar, who carries on business under the same name and style of Messrs Gavaskar
Viswanath & Co., at Mumbai:

Particulars                                                                                  Dr.  Cr.

                                                                                             `    `

Cash in hand                                                                             14,000
Cash at bank                                                                             26,000
Sundry Debtors                                                                         8,60,000
Stock on 1.4.2021                                                                      6,20,000
Furniture & fixtures                                                                   2,14,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.5.500  ACCOUNTING

Office equipment                                    1,60,000
Buildings                                           6,00,000
Motor Car                                           2,00,000
Sundry Creditors
Loan from Viswanath                                                  4,30,000
Provision for bad debts                                              3,00,000
Purchases
Purchase Returns                                                       30,000
Sales                                              14,00,000
Sales Returns
Salaries                                                               26,000
Rent for Godown                                                    23,00,000
Interest on loan from Viswanath                        42,000
Rates & Taxes                                       1,10,000
Discount allowed to Debtors                            55,000
Discount received from Creditors                       27,000
Freight on purchases                                   21,000
Carriage Outwards                                      24,000
Drawings
Printing and Stationery                                                16,000
Electricity Charges                                    12,000
Insurance Premium                                      20,000
General office expenses                             1,20,000
Bad Debts                                              18,000
Bank charges                                           22,000
Motor car expenses                                     55,000
Capital A/c                                            30,000
TOTAL                                                  20,000
                                                       16,000
                                                       36,000

                                                                   16,20,000
                                                   47,22,000 47,22,000

Prepare Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022 and the
Balance Sheet as at that date after making provision for the following:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                                           7.51
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

1. Depreciate: (a) Building used for business by 5 percent; (b) Furniture and fixtures by 10
         percent; One steel table purchased during the year for ` 14,000 was sold for same price
         but the sale proceeds were wrongly credited to Sales Account; (c) Office equipment by 15
         percent; Purchase of a typewriter during the year for ` 40,000 has been wrongly debited
         to purchase; and (d) Motor car by 20%.

2. Value of stock at the close of the year was ` 4,40,000.

3. Two month's rent for godown is outstanding.

4. Interest on loan from Viswanath is payable at 12 percent per annum, this loan was taken
         on 1.5.2021.

5. Provision for bad debts is to be maintained at 5 percent of Sundry Debtors.

6. Insurance premium includes ` 40,000 paid towards proprietor's life insurance policy and
         the balance of the insurance charges cover the period from 1.4.2021 to 30.6.2022.

SOLUTION
                                         M/s Gavaskar Viswanath & Co.

                               Trading for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars                   Details               Amount Particulars                         Details   Amount
                           14,00,000                          `                             23,00,000              `
To opening Stock
To Purchases                  40,000                6,20,000 By Sales                          14,000   22,44,000
                              26,000                               Less: Sale of furniture               4,40,000
Less: Typewriter included                                                     included in      42,000
          in purchases                                                        sale
                                                                   Less: Sales Returns
Less: Purchase Returns
To Freight on purchase                             13,34,000 By Closing Stock
                                                      12,000

To Gross Profit c/d                                 7,18,000
                                                   26,84,000
                                                                                                        26,84,000

                           M/s Gavaskar Viswanath & Co.

Profit/Loss Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particular                             Details Amount Particular                                  Details Amount
                                                              `                                                          `
To Salaries
To Rent for Godown                                  1,10,000 By Gross profit b/d                               7,18,000
                                       55,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                17.5.522  ACCOUNTING

  Add: Outstanding                                 11,000  66,000 By Discount received              16,000
To provision for doubtful                                  33,000                                 7,34,000
debts(4)
To Rent and Taxes                                                 21,000
To Discount Allowed                                               24,000
To Carriage outwards                                              20,000
To printing and stationery                                        18,000
To Electricity charges                                            22,000
To Insurance premium (1)                                          12,000
To Depreciation (2)                                            1,20,000
To general office expenses                                        30,000
To Bank Charges                                                   16,000
To interest on loan                                27,000
                                                    6,000 33,000
   Add: Outstanding (3)                                           36,000
To Motor car expenses                                          1,73,000
To Net Profit transferred to
Capital a/c

                                                           7,34,000

                  Balance Sheet of M/s Gavaskar Vishwanath & Co.

                              as at 31st March, 2022

Liabilities               Details                  Amount Assets                        Details    Amount
                                                           `                                               `

Capital                   16,20,000                        Building              6,00,000         5,70,000
Add: Net Profit            1,73,000                        Less: Dep.            (30,000)
                                                                                                  1,60,000
Less: Drawings            (1,20,000)
                                                                                                  1,70,000
Less: Insurance Premium (40,000) 16,33,000 Motor Car                             2,00,000

                                                           Less: Dep.                   (40,000)

Loan from Vishwanath      3,00,000                 3,06,000 Office equipment     2,00,000
Add: Outstanding             6,000

                                                           Less: Dep.                   (30,000)

Sundry Creditors                                   4,30,000                      2,00,000
Outstanding rent                                     11,000 Furniture & Fixture

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                     7.53
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS
                                                                            (20,000) 1,80,000
                                                          Less: Dep.

                                                                   Stock in Trade             8,60,000   4,40,000
                                                                   Sundry Debtors             (43,000)
                                                                   Less: Provision for                   8,17,000

                                                                              doubtful debts               26,000
                                                                   Cash at hand                            14,000
                                                                   Cash in bank
                                                                   Prepaid insurance (1)                     3,000
                                                   23,80,000                                            23,80,000

Working Notes :
(1) Insurance premium

Insurance premium as given in trial balance                                                            `
                                                                                               55,000
Less: Personal premium                                                                        (40,000)
                                                                                               (3,000)
Less:  Prepaid    for  3  months                   15,000  ×  3 
                                                     15                                        12,000

Transfer to Profit & Loss a/c

(2) Depreciation

Building @ 5% on 6,00,000                                                                       30,000
Motor Car @ 20% on 2,00,000                                                                     40,000
Furniture & Fittings @ 10% on 2,00,000(2,14,000-14,000)                                         20,000
Office Equipment @ 15% on 2,00,000 (1,60,000 + 40,000)                                          30,000
Total                                                                                         1,20,000

(3) Interest on Loan

Interest on Loan (3,00,000 x 12% x 11/12)                                                      33,000
Less : Interest as per Trial Balance                                                          (27,000)
Profit &Loss account (Outstanding )
                                                                                                 6,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     17.5.544                  ACCOUNTING

(4)                            Provision for bad debts a/c

     Particulars                                   Amount Particulars                     Amount
                                                             `                                      `

     To bad debts a/c                              20,000 By balance b/d                  30,000
     To balance c/d                                43,000 By P&L a/c                      33,000
                                                   63,000                                 63,000

(5) Purchase of a typewriter during the year for ` 40,000 which was wrongly debited to
         purchase added to office equipment.

ILLUSTRATION 13

The following are the balances as at 31st March, 2022 extracted from the books of
M/s Mapple States.

 Plant and Machinery                                        `                                      `
 Furniture and Fittings                              19,550 Bad debts recovered                 450
 Bank Overdraft                                      10,250 Salaries                        22,550
 Capital Account                                     80,000 Salaries payable                  2,450
 Drawings                                            65,000 Prepaid rent                        300
 Purchases                                                                                    4,300
 Opening Stock                                         8,000 Rent                             1,125
 Wages                                             1,60,000 Carriage inward                   1,350
 Provision for doubtful debts                                                             2,15,300
 Provision for Discount on                           32,250 Carriage outward                  3,350
 debtors                                             12,165 Sales                             1,250
 Sundry Debtors                                                                               1,450
 Sundry Creditors                                      3,200 Advertisement Expenses           3,125
 Bad debts                                                       Printing and Stationery    10,160
Additional Information:                                                                       3,000
                                                       1,375 Cash in hand
                                                   1,20,000 Cash at bank

                                                     47,500 Office Expenses
                                                       1,100 Interest paid on loan

1. Purchases include sales return of ` 2,575 and sales include purchases return of ` 1,725.

2. Goods withdrawn by Mr. XYZ for own consumption ` 3,500 included in purchases.

3. Wages paid in the month of April for installation of plant and machinery amounting to
         ` 450 were included in wages account.

4. Free samples distributed for publicity costing ` 825.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                          7.55
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

5. Create a provision for doubtful debts @ 5% and provision for discount on debtors @ 2.5%.

6. Depreciation is to be provided on plant and machinery @ 15% p.a. and on furniture and
         fittings @ 10% p.a.

7. Bank overdraft is secured against hypothecation of stock. Bank overdraft outstanding as
         on 31.3.2022 has been considered as 80% of real value of stock (deducting 20% as
         margin) and after adjusting the marginal value 80% of the same has been allowed to
         draw as an overdraft.

Prepare a Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31st March, 2022, and a
Balance Sheet as on that date. Also show the rectification entries.

SOLUTION

                                 Rectification Entries

                        Particulars                               Dr.               Cr.
                                                           Amount       Amount (` )
(i) Returns inward A/c                             Dr.
                                                                  (` )           2,575
Sales A/c                                          Dr.         2,575             1,725
                                                               1,725

          To Purchases A/c

          To Returns outward A/c

(Being sales return and purchases return wrongly included
in purchases and sales respectively, now rectified)

(ii) Drawings A/c                                  Dr.     3,500

          To Purchases A/c                                              3,500

(Being goods withdrawn for own consumption included in
purchases, now rectified)

(iii) Plant and machinery A/c                      Dr.     450
                                                                              450
          To Wages A/c

(Being wages paid for installation of plant and machinery
wrongly debited to wages, now rectified)

(iv) Advertisement expenses A/c                    Dr.     825
                                                                              825
          To Purchases A/c

(Being free samples distributed for publicity out of
purchases, now rectified)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              17.5.566      ACCOUNTING

                                                   M/s Mapple States.

Dr.                     Trading for the year ended 31st March, 2022                             Cr.

                                                   Amount                                       Amount
                                                                                                         `
                            `                      `                                  `
                                                                                                2,11,000
To Opening stock                                   32,250 By Sales                    2,13,575
                                                                                                1,25,000
To Purchases             1,53,100                              Less: Sales return     2,575
                                                                                                3,36,000
     Less: Purchases        1,725 1,51,375 By Closing stock                                             Cr.
     return

To Carriage inward                                     1,125    ` 80,000× 100 × 100 
To Wages                                             11,715            80 80 
To Gross profit c/d                                1,39,535

                                                   3,36,000

                                                   M/s Mapple States

Dr.               Profit and Loss for the year ended 31st March, 2022

To Salaries                                        Amount      By Gross profit b/d              Amount
                                                            `  By Bad debts                              `
To Rent
                                                     22,550          recovered                  1,39,535
To Advertisement expenses                              4,300                                          450
                                                       4,175
To Printing and stationery                             1,250                                    1,39,985
                                                       1,350
To Carriage outward                                    3,900

To Provision for doubtful debts                        1,475
      (ref. WN)
                                                       4,025
To Provision for discount on                         10,160
      debtors
                                                       3,000
     2.5% of ` 1,14,000     2,850
                                                     83,800
     Less:        Existing 1,375                   1,39,985
     provision

To Depreciation:

     Plant and machinery 3,000

     Furniture and fittings 1,025

To Office expenses

To Interest on loan

To Net profit

     (Transferred to capital
     account)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                            7.57
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

                                          M/s Mapple States
                             Balance Sheet as on 31st March, 2022

Liabilities       ` Amount` Assets                                                 ` Amount
Capital account
Add: Net profit   65,000                           Plant and machinery             20,000

Less: Drawings    83,800                           Less: Depreciation              3,000 17,000
Bank overdraft
Sundry creditors  1,48,800                         Furniture and fittings          10,250
Payable salaries
                  11,500 1,37,300 Less: Depreciation                               1,025 9,225

                             80,000 Closing stock                                          1,25,000

                             47,500 Sundry debtors                           1,20,000

                             2,450 Less: Provision for doubtful                    6,000
                                                debts

                                                   Provision for bad               2,850 1,11,150
                                                   debts

                                                   Prepaid rent                            300

                                                   Cash in hand                            1,450

                                                   Cash at bank                            3,125

                             2,67,250                                                      2,67,250

Working Note                 Provision for bad debts a/c

Particulars                                        Amount Particulars                      Amount
                                                             `                                       `
To bad debts a/c
To balance c/d (6,000-3200)                            1,100 By balance b/d                          -
                                                       2,800 By P&L a/c                        3,900
                                                       3,900                                   3,900

      1.9 PROVISIONS AND RESERVES

Provision means "any amount written off or retained by way of providing for depreciation,
renewal or diminution in the value of assets or retained by way of providing for any known
liability of which the amount cannot be determined with substantial accuracy". A provision is
a liability which can be measured only by using a substantial degree of estimation.

Thus, a provision may be either in respect of loss in the value of an asset provided or written
off on the basis of an estimate or the one in respect of a liability for expenses incurred in
respect of a claim which is disputed i.e. when it is a contingent liability. On the occurrence of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.5.588                    ACCOUNTING

a diminution in asset values due to some of them having become irrecoverable or Inventory
items are lost as a result of some natural calamity, amounts contributed or transferred from
profit to make good the diminution also are described as provision.

The following are instances of amount retained in the business out of earning for different
purposes that are described as provisions.

(1) Amount provided for meeting claims which are admissible in principle, but the amount
         whereof has not been ascertained.

(2) An appropriation made for payment of taxes still to be assessed.

(3) Amount set aside for writing off bad debts or payment of discounts.

The portion of earnings, receipts or other surplus of an enterprise (whether capital or revenue)
appropriated by the management for a general or a specific purpose other than a provision
for depreciation or diminution in the value of assets or for a known liability is known as
reserves. The reserves are primarily of two types: capital reserves and revenue reserves. Also
provisions in excess of the amount considered necessary for the purposes these were
originally made, are to be considered as reserves. It is thus evident that provisions are a
charge against profits, while reserve is an appropriation of profits. Also provisions that
ultimately prove to be in excess of amounts required or have been made too liberally are
reserves. Such a distinction is essential for disclosing truly in the Balance Sheet the amount
by which the equity of shareholders has increased with the accumulation of undistributed
profits.

Reserve Fund: It signifies the amount standing to the credit of the reserve that is invested
outside the business in securities which are readily realisable e.g., when the amounts set apart
for replacement of an asset are invested periodically, in government securities or shares. The
account to which these amounts are annually credited is described as the Reserve Fund.

ILLUSTRATION 14

Crimpson traders profit and loss account for the year ended 31st March, 2022 includes the
following information:

                                                   `

(i) Depreciation                                   57,500

(ii) Bad debts written off                         21,000

(iii) Increase in provision for doubtful debts     18,000

(iv) Retained profit for the year                  20,000

(v) Liability for tax                              4,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                 7.59
                                          SOLE PROPRIETORS

Required

State which one of the items (i) to (vi) above are ­ (a) transfer to provisions; (b) transfer to
reserves; and (c) neither related to provisions nor reserves.

SOLUTION

(a) Transfer to provisions - (i), (iii) (v)

(b) Transfer to reserves - (iv)

(c) Neither related to provisions nor reserves - (ii).

A summary of all adjustments are as follows:

Adjustment              If Given in Trial Balance  If Not Given in Trial Balance
1. Closing stock        Balance Sheet ­ Asset
2. Outstanding          Side                       (a) Trading A/c ­ Credit Side
                        Balance Sheet ­ Liability
     Expenses           Side                       (b) Balance Sheet ­ Asset Side

3. Prepaid Expenses     Balance Sheet ­ Asset      (a) Trading/Profit & Loss A/c Debit
                        Side                            Side. Add to the concerned
4. Income                                               expenses.
     Outstanding        Balance Sheet ­ Asset
                        Side                       (b) Balance Sheet ­ Liability Side
5. Incomes Received
     in Advance         Balance Sheet ­ Liability  (a) Trading/Profit & Loss A/c Debit
                        Side                            Side. Deduct from the concerned
6. Bad Debts                                            expense.
                        Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit
7. Provision for Bad    Side                       (b) Balance Sheet - Asset
     or Doubtful debts
                        Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit  (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Credit Side.
                        Side                            Add to the concerned income.

                                                   (b) Balance Sheet ­ Asset Side.

                                                   (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Credit Side.
                                                        Deduct from concerned income.

                                                   (b) Balance Sheet ­ Liability Side

                                                   (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit Side.

                                                   (b) Balance Sheet ­ Asset Side.
                                                        Deduct from debtors .

                                                   (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit Side.

                                                   (b) Balance Sheet ­ Asset        Side.
                                                        Deduct from Debtors         after
                                                        additional bad debts,

                                                        if any.

                                                   (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit Side.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              17.6.600       ACCOUNTING

8. Provision            for  Balance Sheet ­ Asset       (b) Balance Sheet ­ Asset Side.
                             Side Deduct from                 Deduct from debtors after
Discount                on   Debtors.                         providing for provision for bad
                             Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit        debts
Debtors                      Side
                             Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit   (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit Side.
9. Depreciation              Side
                             Profit & Loss A/c ­ Credit  (b) Balance Sheet ­ Asset Side.
10. Interest on Capital      Side                             Deduct from Respective Asset.
                             Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit
11. Interest            on   Side                        (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit Side.

Drawings                     Trading A/c - Credit Side   (b) Balance Sheet ­ Liability Side.
                                                              Add to Capital.
12. Loss by Fire             Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit
                             Side                        (a) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Credit Side.
13. Goods withdrawn          Usually it is not given in
     for personal use        Trial Balance               (b) Balance Sheet ­ Liability Side.
                                                              Deduct from Capital.
14. Goods Distributed
     as free Samples                                     (a) Trading A/c ­ Credit Side (with
                                                              full amount of loss)
15. Sale of Goods on
     Approval Basis,                                     (b) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit Side
     approval not yet                                         (Actual loss, if any) [adjusted
     received                                                 with insurance claim if any]

                                                         (c) Balance Sheet ­ Asset Side (with
                                                              insurance claim admitted by
                                                              Insurance Co.)

                                                         (a) Trading A/c ­ Credit Side or
                                                              Deduct from Purchases.

                                                         (b) Balance Sheet ­ Liability Side
                                                              (Deduct from Capital as
                                                              Drawings)

                                                         (a) Trading A/c ­ Credit Side or
                                                              Deduct from Purchases

                                                         (b) Profit & Loss A/c ­ Debit Side

                                                         (a) Trading A/c ­ Credit Side. Deduct
                                                              from Sales the selling price of
                                                              goods sold and add to stock at
                                                              cost price.

                                                         (b) Balance Sheet ­ Asset Side.
                                                              Deduct from Debtors the selling
                                                              price of such sales and show the
                                                              cost price of such sales along
                                                              with closing stock.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                  7.61
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

      1.10 LIMITATIONS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

Financial statements suffer from a number of limitations. These must, therefore, be studied
with care, in order that correct inferences may be drawn. The limitations are less serious if the
objective is only to appraise the performance of a single company over a period of year Where,
however, a comparison of the working of different companies for the same period is to be
made. It can be misleading unless the companies concerned have followed the same system
and basis of accounting. On the account, a comparison of the performancey of different
industries on the basis of financial statements, should be undertaken only if it is not
practicable to make such a comparison on any other basis.

The principal limitations affecting financial statements are the following:

(a) Historical Cost: Accounting records and, on that account, the financial statements are
         prepared only on the basis of the money value prevailing at the time the transaction
         were entered into. Thus, the effect of subsequent changes in the value of money is not
         taken into account. At times this has the effect of making the statements of account
         quite misleading. Take the obvious example of a house built in 1980, say at the cost of
         `15,000, in 2022 the benefit receivable from its occupation will be as much as that of
         a house created in 2022, say at a cost of `30,00,000. If the house were included in the
         financial statements at its original cost, as normally it would not convey a true picture
         except to a knowledgeable person.

         The limitations can be serious in the case of other fixed assets that have been working
         over a long period over which prices have changed radically. It is, however, not easy to
         get over this difficulty, since revaluation of fixed assets, apart from being costly is not
         practicable when the value of money is continuously falling. On this account, historical
         cost continues to be the accepted basis for the preparation of financial statements.
         Though it may not be possible to do much to remove the limitation mentioned above,
         one must always remember to read the balance sheet and the profit and loss account
         in the light of what they cannot reveal as well as what they do.

(b) Intangible strengths and weaknesses: A company may have a number of strengths
         and weaknesses which cannot be shown in the balance sheet e.g., the loyalty and
         calibre of its staff. These must be kept in mind while judging the financial position of
         the company.

(c) Perpetual continuity and periodical account: Financial statements ordinarily are
         drawn up at the end of each year but the accounting record is maintained on the
         assumption that the business undertaking shall continue to exist forever on the basis
         of going concern assumption. In consequence, much of the expenditure other than
         revenue expenditure has to be distributed arbitrarily over a number of years during

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  17.6.622          ACCOUNTING

         which benefit of the expenditure is expected to arise. As a result, financial statements
         of account are not absolutely correct.

(d) Different accounting policies: It is permissible for a company within certain limits to
         adopt different policies for the preparation of accounts, valuation of various assets and
         distribution of expenditure over different periods of account. For example, a company
         may decide to provide annually for payment of pensions and gratuities to staff and
         thus build up a `fund' out of which payments will be made ultimately whereas another
         company may deal with these only when actual payments are made. Similarly, a
         company may decide whether or not to include intangible assets amongst its assets or
         manner in which the amounts thereof should be written off.

(e) Management policies: Management can have different accounting policies for
         welfare of the staff and public at large.

SUMMARY

  Non-manufacturing entities are the trading entities, which are engaged in the purchase

  and sale of goods at profit without changing the form of the goods.

  For accounting, profit is measured at two levels:

  (a) Gross Profit

  (b) Net Profit

  The principal function of final statements of account (Trading Account, Profit and Loss

  Account and the Balance Sheet) is to exhibit truly and fairly the profitability and the

  financial position of the business to which they relate. In order that these may be

  properly drawn up, it is essential that a proper record of transactions entered into by

  the business during a particular accounting period should be maintained.

  At the end of the year, it is necessary to ascertain the net profit or the net loss. For this

  purpose, it is first necessary to know the gross profit or gross loss. Gross Profit is the

  difference between the selling price and the cost of the goods sold. For a trading firm,

  the cost of goods sold can be ascertained by adjusting the cost of goods still on hand

  at the end of the year against the purchases.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                  7.63
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

True and False

1. The income statement shows either net profit or net loss for a particular period.
2. Gains from the sale or exchange of assets are not considered as the revenue of the

         business.

3. The salary paid in advance is not an expense because it neither reduces assets or nor
         increase liabilities.

4. A loss is an expenditure which does not bring any benefit to the concern.

5. All liabilities which become due for payment within the year are classified as long-term
         liabilities.

6. The term current asset is used to designate cash and other assets or resources which are
         reasonably expected to be realized or sold or consumed within one year.

7. An asset gives rise to expenditure when it is acquired and to an expense when it is
         consumed.

8. If the balance of an account on the debit side of the trial balance where the benefit has
         already expired then it is treated as an expense.

9. Sales less cost of goods sold = gross profit.

10. If the debit side of the trading account exceeds its credit side then the balance is termed
         as gross profit.

11. The provision for bad debts is debited to Sundry Debtors Account.

12. The provision for discount on creditors is often not provided in keeping with the principle
         of conservatism.

13. The debts written off as bad, if recovered subsequently are credited to Debtors Account.

14. The adjustment entry in respect of income received in advance is debit Income received
         in advance account and credit income account.

15. Premium paid on the life policy of a proprietor is debited to profit and loss account.

16. Depreciation account appear in the trial balance is taken only to profit and loss account.
17. Personal purchases included in the purchases day book are added to the sales account

         in the Trading account.

18. Medicines given to the office staff by a manufacturer of medicines will be debited to
         salaries account.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.6.644  ACCOUNTING

19. Goods worth ` 600 taken by the proprietor for personal use should be credited to Capital
         Account.

20. If Closing Stock appears in the Trial Balance, the Closing inventory is then not entered
         in Trading Account. It is only shown in the Balance Sheet.

Multiple Choice Questions

(1) A debit to an account may
         (a) increase expense
         (b) decrease an asset.
         (c) increase a liability.

(2) Prepayment of insurance premium will appear in the Balance Sheet and in the Insurance
         Account respectively as:
         (a) a liability and a debit balance.
         (b) an asset and a debit balance.
         (c) an asset and a credit balance.

(3) Gross profit is the difference between:
         (a) sales and purchases
         (b) sales and cost of sales.
         (c) sales and total expenses.

(4) Payment made to a creditor subject to cash discount will :
         (a) reduce a liability, reduce an asset and add to expenses.
         (b) reduce a liability, add to an asset, and add to revenue.
         (c) reduce an asset, reduce a liability, and add to revenue.

(5) A customer returns goods already charged to him. We should:
         (a) debit his account.
         (b) credit his account.
         (c) make no entry on his account.

(6) Capital is the difference between
         (a) Income and expenses
         (b) Sales and Cost of goods sold

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                  7.65
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

         (c) Assets and liabilities
(7) The capital of a sole trader would change as a result of:

         (a) A creditor being paid his account by cheque.
         (b) Raw materials being purchased on credit.
         (c) Wages being paid in cash.
(8) A decrease in the provision for doubtful debts would result in:
         (a) An increase in liabilities.
         (b) A decrease in working capital.
         (c) An increase in net profit.
(9) A Company wishes to earn a 20% profit margin on selling price. Which of the following
         is the profit mark up on cost, which will achieve the required profit margin?
         (a) 33%
         (b) 25%
         (c) 20%
(10) If sales is ` 2,000 and the rate of gross profit on cost of goods sold is 25%, then the cost
         of goods sold will be
         (a) ` 2,000.
         (b) ` 1,500.
         (c) ` 1,600.
(11) Sales for the year ended 31st March, 2022 amounted to ` 10,00,000. Sales included goods
         sold to Mr. A for ` 50,000 at a profit of 20% on cost. Such goods are still lying in the
         godown at the buyer's risk. Therefore, such goods should be treated as part of
         (a) Sales.
         (b) Closing Inventory.
         (c) Goods in transit.
(12) If sales revenues are ` 4,00,000; cost of goods sold is ` 3,10,000 and expenses are
         ` 60,000, the gross profit is
         (a) ` 30,000.
         (b) ` 90,000.
         (c) ` 3,40,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.6.666             ACCOUNTING

Theoretical questions

1. Write shorts notes on:
         (a) Balance sheet.
         (b) Trading account
         (c) Closing entries

2. Distinguish between Provision and reserve fund.

Practical questions

1. From the following particulars extracted from the books of Ganguli, prepare trading and
         profit and loss account and balance sheet as at 31st March, 2022 after making the
         necessary adjustments:

Ganguli's capital account                                     `                                    `
(Cr.) as on 1.4.2021                                5,40,500 Interest received                7,250
Stock on 1.4.2021
Sales                                               2,34,000 Cash with Traders Bank Ltd.    40,000
Sales return                                       14,48,000 Discounts received             14,950
                                                                                            25,000
Purchases                                              43,000 Investments (at 5%) as on
Purchases return                                                   1.4.2021                   9,000
Carriage inwards                                                                            37,700
Rent                                               12,15,500 Furniture as on 1-4-2021       19,600
Salaries                                               29,000 Discounts allowed
Sundry debtors                                         93,000 General expenses                3,500
Sundry creditors                                       28,500 Audit fees                      3,000
Loan from Dena Bank Ltd.                               46,500 Fire insurance premium        11,650
(at 12%)                                                                                      4,350
Interest paid                                       1,20,000 Travelling expenses              1,900
                                                       74,000 Postage and telegrams
Printing and stationery                                                                   1,50,000
Advertisement                                       1,00,000 Cash in hand
                                                                                            50,000
                                                        4,500 Deposits at 10% as on
                                                                   1-4-2021 (Dr.)

                                                       17,000 Drawings
                                                       56,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                            7.67
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS

Adjustments:

(1) Value of stock as on 31st March, 2022 is ` 3,93,000. This includes goods returned
         by customers on 31st March, 2022 to the value of ` 15,000 for which no entry has
         been passed in the books.

(2) Purchases include furniture purchased on 1st January, 2022 for `10,000.

(3) Depreciation should be provided on furniture at 10% per annum.

(4) The loan account from Dena bank in the books of Ganguli appears as follows:

31.3.2022 To Balance                                        `                                `
                c/d                                                                   50,000
                                                   1,00,000 1.4.2021 By Balance
                                                                                 b/d  50,000

                                                                 31.3.2022 By Bank

                                                   1,00,000                           1,00,000

(5) Sundry debtors include ` 20,000 due from Robert and sundry creditors include
         ` 10,000 due to him.

(6) Interest paid include ` 3,000 paid to Dena bank.

(7) Interest received represents ` 1,000 from the sundry debtors (due to delay on their
         part) and the balance on investments and deposits.

(8) Provide for interest payable to Dena bank and for interest receivable on
         investments and deposits.

         (9) Make provision for doubtful debts at 5% on the balance under sundry debtors. No
                   such provision need to be made for the deposits.

2. Sengupta & Co. employs a team of eight workers who were paid `30,000 per month each
         in the year ending 31st March, 2021. At the start of financial year 2021-2022, the
         company raised salaries by 10% to `33,000 per month each.

         On October 1, 2021 the company hired two trainees at salary of `21,000 per month each.
         The work force are paid salary on the first working day of every month, one month in
         arrears, so that the employees receive their salary for January on the first working day
         of February etc.

You are required to calculate:

(i) Amount of salaries which would be charged to the profit and loss for the year ended
         31st March, 2022.

(ii) Amount actually paid as salaries during 2021-22

(iii) Outstanding Salaries as on 31st March, 2022.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.6.688                   ACCOUNTING

3. You are required, prepare a Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ending 31st
         March, 2022 and a Balance Sheet as on that date from the Trial Balance given below:

Particulars                                                 ` Particulars                    `
Debit Balance:
Trade receivables                                  3,50,000 Salaries               2,20,000
Inventory 1st April, 2021                          5,00,000 Purchases              12,50,00
Cash in Hand                                       5,60,000 Plant and Machinery   15,70,000
Wages                                              3,00,000 Credit Balance:
Bad Debts                                                                         25,00,000
Furniture and Fixtures                               50,000 Capital                9,00,000
Depreciation                                       1,50,000 Trade payables
                                                   1,50,000 Sales                 17,00,000

On 31st March, 2022 the Inventory was valued at `10,00,000.

4. Mr. Kotriwal is engaged in business of selling magazines. Several of his customers pay
         money in advance for subscribing his magazines. Information related to year ended 31st
         March 2022 has been given below:

On 1.4.2021 he had a balance of ` 2,00,000 advance from customers of which ` 1,50,000
is related to year 2021-22 while remaining pertains to year 2022-23. During the year
2021-22 he made cash sales of ` 5,00,000. You are required to compute:

(i) Total income for the year 2021-22.

(ii) Total money received during the year if the closing balance in advance from
         customers account is ` 1,70,000.

5. Mr. Birla is a proprietor engaged in business of trading electronics. An excerpt from his
         Trading & P&L account is as follows:

Trading and P&L A/c for the year ended 31st March, 2022

Particulars                                                   ` Particulars             `
To Cost of Goods Sold                              45,00,000 By Sales             C
To Gross Profit c/d
                                                       D

                                                   F                              F

To Rent A/c                                        26,00,000 By Gross Profit b/d  D
To Office Expenses
                                                   13,00,000 By  Miscellaneous    E
To Selling Expenses
                                                      Income

                                                   B

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                            7.69
                                SOLE PROPRIETORS                              60,00,000

To Commission to Manager (on                       2,00,000
Net Profit before charging such
commission)                                           A
                                                     G
To Net Profit

Commission is charged at the rate of 10%.
Selling Expenses amount to 1% of total sales.
You are required to compute the missing figures.

ANSWERS/HINTS

True and False

1. True: Profit and loss account shows either net profit or net loss for a particular period.

2. False: Gains from the sale or exchange of assets are considered as the revenue of the
         business. But this revenue not in the ordinary course of business so it is capital receipts.

3. True: The salary paid in advance is an asset it is not an expense because it neither
         reduces assets or nor increase liabilities.

4. True: A loss is an expenditure of the business which does not bring any gain to the
         business.

5. False: All liabilities which become due for payment within one year are classified as
         current liabilities.

6. True: Current assets are all the assets which are expected to be realized or sold or
         consumed within one year.

7. True: When an asset is purchase capital expenditure is incurred and when the asset is
         put to use expenses are incurred in consumption.

8. True: Debit balance of accounts are treated as expenses whose benefit is already
         received or expired.

9. True: Gross profit is obtained by deducting cost of goods sold from sales.

10. False: If the debit side of the trading account exceeds its credit side then the balance
         is termed as gross loss.

11. False: The provision for bad debts is debited to debited to Profit and loss Account, in
         Balance Sheet it is shown either on liability side or deducted from the head Debtors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.7.700  ACCOUNTING

12. True: According to the provision of conservatism provision is maintained for the losses
         to be incurred in future. Discount on creditors is an income so provision in not
         maintained.

13. False: The debts written off as bad, if recovered subsequently are credited to Bad Debts
         Recovered Account and becomes an income.

14. False: Income received in advance is reduces it from the concerned income in profit
         and loss account. And it is shows it as a liability in the current balance sheet under the
         head Current Liabilities.

15. False: Premium paid on the life policy of a proprietor is to be debited to capital account,
         as it is personal expense.

16. True: Depreciation is charge on each of the asset on a certain percentage. Depreciation
         is a charge to profit and loss account and should be debited to profit & loss account
         by crediting the respective assets. If it appears in trial balance then it is taken only to
         profit and loss account.

17. False: Personal purchases included in the purchases day book are deducted from the
         purchases account in the Trading account.

18. True: Any benefit given to the staff is debited to the salary account.

19. False: Goods taken by the proprietor for personal use should be credited to Purchase
         Account as less goods are left in the business for sale.

20. True: The closing Stock appears in the trial balance only when it is adjusted against
         purchases by passing the entry. In this case, closing stock is not entered in Trading
         Account and is shown only in Balance Sheet.

Multiple Choice Questions

    1. (a) 2. (c) 3. (b) 4. (c) 5. (b) 6. (c)

    7. (c) 8. (c) 9. (b) 10. (c) 11. (a) 12. (b)

Theoretical Questions

1. (a) The balance sheet may be defined as "a statement which sets out the assets
                   and liabilities of a firm or an institution as at a certain date." Since even a single
                   transaction will make a difference to some of the assets or liabilities, the balance
                   sheet is true only at a particular point of time. That is the significance of the
                   word "as at."

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                                                   7.71
                                    SOLE PROPRIETORS

         (b) At the end of the year, it is necessary to ascertain the net profit or the net loss.
                   For this purpose, it is first necessary to know the gross profit or gross loss with
                   the helps to Trading A/c. Gross Profit is the difference between the selling price
                   and the cost of the goods sold.

         (c) Closing entries: The entries that have to be made in the journal for preparing
                   the Trading and the Profit and Loss Account that is for transferring the various
                   accounts to these two accounts are known as closing entries.

2. Provision means "any amount written off or retained by way of providing for
         depreciation, renewal or diminution in the value of assets or retained by way of
         providing for any known liability of which the amount cannot be determined with
         substantial accuracy".

         Reserve Fund: It signifies the amount standing to the credit of the reserve that is
         invested outside the business in securities which are readily realisable e.g., when the
         amounts set apart for replacement of an asset are invested periodically, in government
         securities or shares. The account to which these amounts are annually credited is
         described as the Reserve Fund.

Practical Questions

1.                               In the books of Ganguli

    Trading and Profit & Loss Account for the year ended 31st March,2022

                                                   `  `                                       `     `

    To Opening stock             12,15,500            2,34,000 By Sales                 14,48,000   13,90,000
    To Purchases                                                    Less: Returns         (58,000)

    Less: Transfer to furniture    (10,000)                           By Closing stock              3,93,000
    A/c                                               11,76,500
                                 12,05,500
    Less: Returns                  (29,000)

    To Carriage inwards                                   93,000                                    17,83,000
    To Gross profit c/d                                2,79,500                                      2,79,500
                                                      17,83,000
    To Salaries                                                                                         17,250
    To Rent                                               46,500 By Gross profit
                                                                      b/d

                                                          28,500 By Interest

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             17.7.722       ACCOUNTING

To Advertisement                                   56,000 By           Discount              14,950

To Printing & stationery                                     received
To Interest
To Discount allowed                                17,000
To General expenses
To Travelling expenses                             7,500
To Fire insurance premium
To Postage & telegrams                             37,700
To Provision for doubtful
debts (W.N.I)                                      19,600
To Depreciation on
furniture                                          11,650
To Audit fees
To Capital A/c (Net profit                         3,000

    transferred)                                   4,350

                                                   4,750

                                                   1,150

                                                    3,500
                                                   70,500

                                                   3,11,700                                  3,11,700

                            Balance Sheet as at 31st March,2022

Liabilities                 `                      ` Assets                         `        `

Capital account:                                   Furniture                         9,000
                                                                                    10,000
Balance on             1st 5,40,500                Additions during the
April,2021                                         year

Add: Net profit             70,500                                                  19,000
                                                                                    (1,150) 17,850
                            6,11,000               Less: Depreciation
                                                                                                  25,000
Less: Drawings              (50,000) 5,61,000 Investments                                       1,50,000

Loan from Dena Bank                                1,00,000 Deposits
Ltd.

Insurance accrued on                               3,000 Interest accrued on                 10,000
bank loan (W.N.2)                                            investment & deposits
                                                             (W.N.3)

Sundry creditors                                   64,000 Stock in trade                     3,93,000
                                                                                               90,250
                                                   Sundry debtors                   95,000
                                                                                    (4,750)
                                                   Less: Provision

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                      7.73
                                      SOLE PROPRIETORS

                                                                 Cash with Traders Bank    40,000
                                                                 Ltd.
                                                                 Cash in hand                1,900
                                                                                         7,28,000
                                                   7,28,000
                                                                                                  `
Working Notes:                                                                           1,20,000
                                                                                         (15,000)
1.    Calculation of provision for doubtful debts:                                       1,05,000
                                                                                         (10,000)
      Sundry debtors as per trial balance
                                                                                           95,000
      Less: Sales returns not recorded                                                       4,750

      Less: Cancellation against sundry creditors                                            6,000
                                                                                           (3,000)
      Adjusted balance of sundry debtors
                                                                                             3,000
      Provision for doubtful debts @ 5%
                                                                                             1,250
2.    Accrued interest on bank loan:                                                       15,000
                                                                                           16,250
      Annual interest @12%                                                                 (6,250)
                                                                                           10,000
      Less: Interest paid to Dena bank

      Accrued interest

3.    Interest accrued on investments and deposits:

      Annual interest on investments @ 5%

      Annual interest on deposits @ 10%

      Less: Interest received on investments and deposits
      Accrued interest

2.                                                                                       `

(i)   Salaries to be charged to profit and loss account for the year

      ended 31st March, 2022:

      Salaries of 8 employees for full year @ ` 33,000 per month each                    31,68,000

      Salaries of 2 trainees for 6 months @ ` 21,000 p.m.                                2,52,000

                                                                                         34,20,000

(ii)  Salaries actually paid in 2021-22

      March, 2021 salaries paid in April, 2021 (8 x 30,000)                              2,40,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       17.7.744   ACCOUNTING

       Salaries of 8 employees for April 2021 to March, 2022 paid in

       May 2021 to March 2022 @ ` 33,000 for 11 months                                    29,04,000

       Salaries of 2 trainees for October 2021 to February 2022 paid in

       November 2021 to March 2022 @ ` 21,000 for 5 months                                2,10,000

                                                                                          33,54,000

(iii)  Outstanding salaries as at 31st March, 2022

       8 employees @ ` 33,000 each for 1 month                                            2,64,000

       2 trainees @ ` 21,000 each for 1 month                                             42,000

                                                                                          3,06,000

3. Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ending 31st March, 2022

Particulars                                                   ` Particulars                          `
To Opening Inventory                                5,00,000 By Sales                     17,00,000
To Purchases                                       12,50,000 By Closing Inventory         10,00,000
To Wages                                            3,00,000
To Gross Profit                                     6,50,000                              27,00,000
                                                   27,00,000                               6,50,000
To Bad Debts
To Depreciation                                        50,000 By Gross Profit              6,50,000
To Salaries                                         1,50,000
To Net Profit transferred. to Capital A/c           2,20,000
                                                    2,30,000
                                                    6,50,000

                  Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2022

Liabilities       `                                ` Assets                        `      `
Trade payables
Capital:                                           9,00,000 Cash in Hand  5,60,000
Previous Balance
Add : Net Profit                                              Trade receivables 3,50,000

                  25,00,000                                   Closing Inventory 10,00,000 19,10,000

                  2,30,000 27,30,000

                                                              Furniture   & 1,50,000
                                                              Fixtures

                                                              Plant & Machinery 15,70,000 17,20,000

                                                   36,30,000                              36,30,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      PREPARATIONS OF FINAL ACCOUNTS OF                      7.75
                                      SOLE PROPRIETORS

4. (i) Computation of Income for the year 2021-22:
                                                                                                                             `

      Money received during the year related to 2021-22                              5,00,000
      Add: Money received in advance during previous years                           1,50,000
      Total income of the year 2021-22                                               6,50,000

(ii)                    Advance from Customers A/c

      Date Particulars                             ` Date    Particulars             `

               To Sales A/c                        1,50,000 1.4.2021 By Balance      2,00,000
                                                                                b/d  1,20,000

               (Advance related                              By Bank A/c
               to current year                               (Balancing
               transferred to                                Figure)
               sales)

      31.3.22  To Balance c/d                      1,70,000

                                                3,20,000                             3,20,000
      So, total money received during the year is:

                                                                                     `

      Cash Sales during the year                                                     5,00,000
      Add: Advance received during the year                                          1,20,000

      Total money received during the year                                           6,20,000

5. A) Computation of Net Profit:
                   Commission Manager = Rate of Commission X Net Profit before charging such
                   commission

                   So, Commission to manager = 10/100 X Net Profit before charging such
                   commission
                   = ` 2,00,000 = 10/100 X Net Profit before charging such commission
                   = Net Profit before charging such commission = ` 20,00,000
                    Net Profit (A) = ` (20,00,000 - 2,00,000) = `18,00,000

         B) Computation of Selling Expenses:
                   Total income appearing in P&L A/c = ` 60,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
17.7.766     ACCOUNTING

Total expenses other than selling expenses = `(26,00,000 + 13,00,000 +
2,00,000)= ` 41,00,000

So, Selling Expenses + Remaining Expenses + Net Profit = Total Income

= Selling Expenses = ` 60,00,000 -` 41,00,000 - ` 18,00,000

= Selling Expenses = ` 1,00,000

C) Computation of Sales:

We have been given selling expenses amount to 1% of Sales

So, Sales =  Selling  Expenses ×100                =  1,00,000 ×100  =  `  100,00,000
                      1                                   1

D) Computation of Gross Profit:

                                                   Trading A/c

Particulars                                                     ` Particulars                       `
To COGS                                             45,00,000 By Sales (from C         100,00,000

To Gross Profit (Balancing Figure)                                  above)             100,00,000
Total (F)                                           55,00,000

                                                   100,00,000 Total (F)

So, Gross Profit (D) = ` 55,00,000

E) Miscellaneous Income                            = Total Income in P&L - Gross Profit

                                                   = ` (60,00,000 - 55,00,000) = ` 5,00,000

F) = ` 100,00,000 (As computed in D above)

G) = ` 60,00,000 (Total of both sides of P&L is equal after balancing has been
            done)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
