CHAPTER  2

THEORY OF DEMAND
AND SUPPLY

       UNIT -1: LAW OF DEMAND
       AND ELASTICITY OF DEMAND

                                          LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to:

 Explain the meaning of Demand.
 Describe what Determines Demand.
 Explain the Law of Demand.
 Explain the difference between Movement along the Demand Curve and Shift

         of the Demand Curve.
 Define and Measure Elasticity.
 Apply the Concepts of Price, Cross and Income Elasticities.
 Explain the Determinants of Elasticity.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.2        BUSINESS ECONOMICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

           THEORY OF DEMAND AND SUPPLY

Demand                                                                      Supply

                      Determinants                        Determinants
           Law of Demand                                    of Supply

                                                                            Law of Supply

      - Demand Schedule                                   - Expansion and   - Supply Schedule
        - Demand Curve                                      Contraction of    - Supply Curve
                                                                 Demand
Elasticity of Demand                                       - Increase and         - Expansion &
                                                               Decrease in        Contraction of
                                                                 Demand
                                                                                        Supply
Price      Income                                  Cross  Advertisement             - Increase &
                                                                                    Decrease in

                                                                                        Supply

Theory of Consumer Behaviour

                                                                            Elasticity of
                                                                               Supply

Marginal    Indifference
  Utility  Curve Analysis
Analysis

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND SU1P.3PLY                     2.3

Consider the following hypothetical situation:

Aroma Tea Limited is considering diversifying its business. A meeting of the board of directors is
called. While discussing the matter, Rajeev Aggarwal, the CEO of Aroma Tea Limited asks,
Sanjeev Bhandari, the marketing head, "What do you think Sanjeev, should we enter into green
tea business also? What does the market pulse say? Who all are there in this market? How will
the demand for green tea affect the demand for our black tea? Is green tea a luxury good or is it
a necessity now? What are the key determinants of the demand for green tea? Will coffee
drinkers or soft drinkers shift to green tea? The answers to these questions will help us better
understand how to price and position our brand in the market. "Before we rush into this line, I
want a report on exactly why you believe green tea will be the star of our company in the
coming five years?"

As an entrepreneur of a firm or as a manager of a company, you would often face situations
in which you have to answer questions similar to the above. Why do prices change when
events such as weather changes, wars, pandemics or new discoveries occur? Why is it that
some producers are able to charge higher prices than others? The answers to these and a
thousand other questions can be found in the theory of demand and supply.

The market system is governed by market mechanism. Demand and supply are the forces
that make market economies work. These two together determine the price and quantity
sold of a commodity or service. While buyers constitute the demand side of the market,
sellers make the supply side of that market. Since business firms produce goods and services
to be sold in the market, it is important for them to know how much of their products would
be wanted by buyers during a given period of time. The buyers include consumers,
businesses and even government. The quantity that the buyers buy at a given price
determines the size of the market. As we are aware, as far as a firm is concerned, the size of
the market is a significant determinant of its prospects.

When a market is competitive, its behaviour is suitably described by the demand and supply
model. We understand that the terms demand and supply refer to the behaviour of buyers
and sellers respectively as they interact each other in markets. A thorough understanding of
the demand and supply theory is therefore essential for any business firm. We shall study
the theory of demand in this Unit. The theory of supply will be discussed in Unit-3.

    1.0 MEANING OF DEMAND

The term `demand' refers to the quantity of a good or service that buyers are willing and
able to purchase at various prices during a given period of time. It is to be noted that
demand, in Economics, is something more than the desire to purchase, though desire is one

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.4  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

element of it. For example, people may desire much bigger houses, luxurious cars etc. But
there are also constraints that they face such as prices of products and limited means to pay.
Thus, wants or desires together with the real world constraints determine what they buy. The
effective demand for a thing depends on (i) desire (ii) means to purchase and (iii) willingness
to use those means for that purchase. Unless desire is backed by purchasing power or ability
to pay and willingness to pay, it does not constitute demand. Effective demand alone would
figure in economic analysis and business decisions.

Two things are to be noted about the quantity demanded.

(i) The quantity demanded is always expressed at a given price. At different prices different
         quantities of a commodity are generally demanded.

(ii) The quantity demanded is a flow. We are concerned not with a single isolated purchase,
         but with a continuous flow of purchases and we must therefore express demand as `so
         much per period of time' i.e., one thousand dozens of oranges per day, seven thousand
         dozens of oranges per week and so on.

In short "By demand, we mean the various quantities of a given commodity or service which
consumers would buy in one market during a given period of time, at various prices, or at
various incomes, or at various prices of related goods".

    1.1 WHAT DETERMINES DEMAND?

Knowledge of the common determinants of demand for a product or service and the nature
of relationship between demand and its determinants are essential for a business firm for
estimating the market demand for its products. There are a number of factors which
influence the demand for a commodity. All these factors are not equally important.
Moreover, some of these factors cannot be easily measured or quantified. The important
factors that determine demand are given below.

(i) Price of the commodity: Obviously, the good's own price is a key determinant of its
         demand. Ceteris paribus i.e. other things being equal, the demand for a commodity is
         inversely related to its price. It implies that a rise in the price of a commodity brings
         about a fall in the quantity purchased and vice-versa. This happens because of income
         and substitution effects.

(ii) Price of related commodities: Related commodities are of two types: (i)
         complementary goods and (ii) competing goods or substitutes.

         Complementary goods and services are those that are bought or consumed together or
         simultaneously. Examples are: tea and sugar, automobile and petrol and pen and ink.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND SU1P.5PLY                     2.5

         The increase in the demand for one causes an increase in the demand for the other.
         When two commodities are complements, a fall in the price of one (other things being
         equal) will cause the demand for the other to rise. For example, a fall in the price of
         petrol-driven cars would lead to a rise in the demand for petrol. Similarly, computers and
         computer software are complementary goods. A fall in the price of computers will cause
         a rise in the demand for software. The reverse will be the case when the price of a
         complement rises. An increase in the price of a complementary good reduces the
         demand for the good in question. Thus, we find that, there is an inverse relation between
         the demand for a good and the price of its complement.

         Two commodities are called competing goods or substitutes when they satisfy the
         same want and can be used with ease in place of one another. For example, tea and
         coffee, ink pen and ball pen, different brands of toothpaste etc. are substitutes for
         each other and can be used in place of one another easily. When goods are
         substitutes, if the price of a product being purchased goes up, buyers may switch to
         a cheaper substitute. This decreases the demand for the product at a given price, but
         increases the demand for the substitute. Similarly, a fall in the price of a product
         (ceteris paribus) leads to a fall in the quantity demanded of its substitutes. For
         example, if the price of tea falls, people will try to substitute it for coffee and demand
         more of it and less of coffee i.e. the demand for tea will rise and that of coffee will
         fall. Therefore, there is direct or positive relation between the demand for a product
         and the price of its substitutes.

(iii) Disposable Income of the consumer: The purchasing power of a buyer is
         determined by the level of his disposable income. Other things being equal, the
         demand for a commodity depends upon the disposable income of the potential
         purchasers. In general, increase in disposable income tends to increase the demand
         for particular types of goods and services at any given price. A decrease in disposable
         income generally lowers the quantity demanded at all possible prices.

         The nature of relationship between disposable income and quantity demanded
         depends upon the nature of goods. A basic description of the nature of goods is
         useful in describing the effect of income on demand.

         Normal goods are those that are demanded in increasing quantities as consumers'
         income increases. Most goods and services fall under the category of normal goods.
         Household furniture, clothing, automobiles, consumer durables and semi durables
         etc. fall in this category. When income is reduced (for example due to recession),
         demand for normal goods falls.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.6  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         There are some commodities for which the quantity demanded rises only up to a
         certain level of income and decreases with an increase in money income beyond this
         level. These goods are called inferior goods.

         Essential consumer goods such as food grains, fuel, cooking oil, necessary clothing
         etc. satisfy the basic necessities of life and are consumed by all individuals in a
         society. A change in consumers' income, although will cause an increase in demand
         for these necessities, but this increase will be less than proportionate to the increase
         in income. This is because as people become richer, there is a relative decline in the
         importance of food and other non durable goods in the overall consumption basket
         and a rise in the importance of durable goods such as a TV, car, house etc. Demand
         for luxury goods and prestige goods arise beyond a certain level of consumers'
         income and keep rising as income increases.

         Business managers should be fully aware of the nature of goods which they produce
         (or the nature of need which their products satisfy) and the nature of relationship of
         quantities demanded with changes in buyers' incomes. For assessing the current as
         well as future demand for their products, they should also recognize the movements
         in the macro economic variables that affect buyers' incomes.

(iv) Tastes and preferences of buyers: The demand for a commodity also depends upon
         the tastes and preferences of buyers and changes in them over a period of time.
         Goods which are modern or more in fashion command higher demand than goods
         which are of old design or are out of fashion. Consumers may perceive a product as
         obsolete and discard it before it is fully utilised and then prefer another good which
         is currently in fashion. For example, there is greater demand for the latest digital
         devices and trendy clothing and we find that more and more people are discarding
         these goods currently in use even though they could have used it for some more
         years.

         External effects on utility such as' demonstration effect',' bandwagon effect', Veblen
         effect and `snob effect' do play important roles in determining the demand for a
         product. Demonstration effect, a term coined by James Duesenberry, refers to the
         desire of people to emulate the consumption behaviour of others. In other words,
         people buy or have things because they see that other people are able to have them.
         For example, an individual's demand for cell phone may be affected by his seeing a
         new model of cell phone in his neighbour's or friend's house, either because he likes
         what he sees or because he figures out that if his neighbour or friend can have it, he
         too can.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND SU1P.7PLY                                 2.7

Bandwagon effect refers to the extent to which the demand for a commodity is
increased due to the fact that others are also consuming the same commodity. It
represents the desire of people to purchase a commodity in order to be fashionable
or stylish or to conform to the people they wish to be associated with.

By `snob effect' we refer to the extent to which the demand for a consumers' good is
decreased owing to the fact that others are also consuming the same commodity.
This represents the desire of people to be exclusive; to be different; to dissociate
themselves from the "common herd." For example, when a product becomes
common among all, some people decrease or altogether stop its consumption.

Difference between Demonstration/Bandwagon Effect and Snob Effect

Demonstration/Bandwagon                                        Snob Effect
               Effect

It is a psychological effect in                    It is understood as the desire to possess a unique
which people do the same                           commodity having a prestige value. It is quite
what others are doing. They                        opposite to the bandwagon or demonstration
do not have their own belief                       effect.
and thinking.

It leads to increase in demand It leads to decrease in demand of a particular

of a particular commodity.                         commodity.

Example: When some people                          Example: If Miss. X and Miss. Y are rich rivals of
start investing money in share                     each other and if in any party Miss. X wears an
market then many people start                      expensive dress and on seeing it Miss. Y who also
following the same without                         having the same dress decided to reject the use of
considering its advantages and                     the same dress further. Rather Miss. Y will try to use
disadvantages.                                     even more expensive one.

Highly priced goods are consumed by status seeking rich people to satisfy their need
for conspicuous consumption. This is called `Veblen effect' (named after the
American economist Thorstein Veblen). For example, expensive cars and jewels. The
distinction between the snob effect and the Veblen effect is that the former is a
function of the consumption of others and the latter is a function of price. We
conclude that people have tastes and preferences and these do change - sometimes,
due to external and sometimes due to internal causes - and influence demand.

Knowledge regarding tastes and preferences is extremely valuable for the
manufacturers and marketers as it would help them appropriately design new models
of products and services and plan production to suit the changing tastes and needs
of the customers.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.8  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

(v) Consumers' Expectations

         Consumers' expectations regarding future prices, income, supply conditions etc.
         influence current demand. If the consumers expect increase in future prices, increase
         in income and shortages in supply, more quantities will be demanded. If they expect
         a fall in price or fall in income they will postpone their purchases of nonessential
         commodities and therefore, the current demand for them will fall. Levels of consumer
         and business confidence about their future economic situations also affect spending
         and demand.

         Other factors: Apart from the above factors, the demand for a commodity depends
         upon the following factors:

         (a) Size of population: Generally, larger the size of population of a country or a
                   region, larger would be the number of buyers and the quantity demanded in
                   the market would be higher at every price. The opposite is the case when
                   population is less.

         (b) Age Distribution of population: If a larger proportion of people belong to
                   older age groups relative to younger age groups, there will be increased
                   demand for geriatric care services, spectacles, walking sticks, etc. and less
                   demand for children's books. Similarly, if the population consists of more of
                   children, demand for toys, baby foods, toffees, etc. will be more. Likewise, if
                   there is migration from rural areas to urban areas, there will be decrease in
                   demand for goods and services in rural areas.

         (c) The level of National Income and its Distribution: The level of national
                   income is a crucial determinant of market demand. Higher the national
                   income, higher will be the demand for all normal goods and services. The
                   wealth of a country may be unevenly distributed so that there are a few very
                   rich people while the majority is very poor. Under such conditions, the
                   propensity to consume of the country will be relatively less, because the
                   propensity to consume of the rich people is less than that of the poor people.
                   Consequently, the demand for consumer goods will be comparatively less. If
                   the distribution of income is more equal, then the propensity to consume of
                   the country as a whole will be relatively high indicating higher demand for
                   goods.

         (d) Consumer-credit facility and interest rates: Availability of credit facilities
                   induces people to purchase more than what their current incomes permit
                   them. Credit facilities mostly determine the demand for investment and for

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND SU1P.9PLY                     2.9

                   durable goods which are expensive and require bulk payments at the time of
                   purchase. Low rates of interest encourage people to borrow and therefore
                   demand will be more.

         (e) Government policies and regulations: The governments influence demand
                   through its taxation, purchases, expenditure, and subsidy policies. While taxes
                   increase prices and decrease the quantity demanded, subsidies decrease the
                   prices and increase the quantity demanded. For example taxes on luxurious
                   goods and subsidies for solar panels. Similarly total bans, restrictions and higher
                   taxes may be used by government to restrict the demand for socially undesirable
                   goods and services. Government's policy on international trade also will affect
                   the domestic demand for goods and services.

                   Apart from above, factors such as weather conditions, business conditions, stage
                   of business cycle, wealth, levels of education, marital status, socioeconomic class,
                   group membership, habits of the consumer, social customs and conventions,
                   salesmanship and advertisements also play important roles in influencing
                   demand.

    1.2 THE DEMAND FUNCTION

As we know, a function is a symbolic statement of a relationship between the dependent and
the independent variables.

The demand function states in equation form, the relationship between the demand for a
product (the dependent variable) and its determinants (the independent or explanatory
variables). Any other factors that are not explicitly listed in the demand function are assumed to
be irrelevant or held constant. A simple demand function may be expressed as follows:

                                                      Qx= f (PX, Y, Pr,)

Where Qx is the quantity demanded of product X

         PX is the price of the commodity

         Y is the money income of the consumer, and

         Pr is the price of related goods

The demand function stated as above does not indicate the exact quantitative relationship
between Qx and PX, M and Pr,. For this, we need to write the demand function in a particular
form with specified values of the explanatory variables appearing on the right-hand side. For
example; we may write Qx=45 + 2y + 1 Pr, ­ 2 P. In this unit, we will be studying demand as a
function of only price, keeping everything else constant.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.10  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

    1.3 THE LAW OF DEMAND

Most of us have an implicit understanding of the law of demand. The law of demand is one
of the most important laws of economic theory. The law states the nature of relationship
between the quantity demanded of a product and its price. Prof. Alfred Marshall defined
the Law thus: "The greater the amount to be sold, the smaller must be the price at
which it is offered in order that it may find purchasers or in other words the amount
demanded increases with a fall in price and diminishes with a rise in price".

The law of demand states that other things being equal, when the price of a good rises , the
quantity demanded of the good will fall. Thus, there is an inverse relationship between price
and quantity demanded, ceteris paribus. The `other things' which are assumed to be equal or
constant are the prices of related commodities, income of consumers, tastes and
preferences of consumers, and all factors other than price which influence demand.(Refer
section 1.1 above).If these factors which determine demand also undergo a change, then the
inverse price-demand relationship may not hold good. For example, if incomes of
consumers increase, then an increase in the price of a commodity, may not result in a
decrease in the quantity demanded of it. Thus, the constancy of these `other factors' is an
important assumption of the law of demand.

The quantity demanded is the amount of a good or service that consumers are willing to
buy at a given price, holding constant all the other factors that influence purchases. The
quantity demanded of a good or service can exceed the quantity actually sold.

The Law of Demand may be illustrated with the help of a demand schedule and a demand
curve.

1.3.0 The Demand Schedule

A demand schedule is a table showing the quantities of a good that buyers would choose to
purchase at different prices, per unit of time, with all other variables held constant. To
illustrate the relation between the quantity of a commodity demanded and its price, we may
take a hypothetical data for prices and quantities of ice-cream. A demand schedule is drawn
upon the assumption that all the other influences remain unchanged. It thus attempts to
isolate the influence exerted by the price of the good upon the amount sold.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P1P1LY                 2.11

   Table 1: Demand Schedule of an Individual Buyer

   Price per cup of ice-cream Quantity of ice-cream demanded (per week)

   (in `)                                          (Cups)

A  60                                              0

B  50                                              2

C  40                                              4

D  30                                              6

E  20                                              8

F  10                                              10

G  0                                               12

Table 1 shows how many cups of ice-cream this particular buyer buys each week at different
prices of ice-cream, holding constant everything else that influences how much of ice-cream
this particular consumer wants to buy. If ice-cream is free (price =0), she consumes 12cups
of ice-cream per week. As the price rises, she buys fewer and fewer cups of ice-cream. When
the price reaches `60 per cup, she does not buy ice-cream at all. The above table depicts an
inverse relationship between price and quantity of ice-cream demanded. We may note that
that the demand schedule obeys the law of demand: As the price of ice-cream increases,
ceteris paribus, the quantity demanded falls.

1.3.1 The Demand Curve

A demand curve is a graphical presentation of the demand schedule. By convention, the
vertical axis of the graph measures the price per unit of the good. The horizontal axis
measures the quantity of the good, which is usually expressed in some physical measure per
time period. By plotting each pair of values as a point on a graph and joining the resulting
points, we get the individual's demand curve for a commodity. It shows the relationship
between the quantities of a good that buyers are willing to buy and the price of the good.
We can now plot the data from Table 1 on a graph.

In Fig. 1, we have shown such a graph and plotted the seven points corresponding to each
price-quantity combination shown in Table 1. The demand curve hits the vertical axis at
price `60 indicating that no quantity is demanded when the price is ` 60 (or higher). The
demand curve hits the horizontal quantity axis at 12, the amount ice-cream that the
consumer wants if the price is zero. Point A shows the same information as the first row of
Table 1, and Point G shows the same information as does the last row of the table.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.12  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

                                      Fig. 1: Demand Curve for Ice-cream
We now draw a smooth curve through these points. The curve is called the demand curve
for ice-cream and shows the quantity of ice-cream that the consumer would like to buy at
each price. The negative or downward slope indicates that the quantity demanded increases
as the price falls. Consumers are usually ready to buy more if the price is lower. Briefly put,
more of a good will be purchased at lower prices. Thus, the downward sloping demand
curve is in accordance with the law of demand which, as stated above, describes an inverse
price-demand relationship.
The slope of a demand curve is - P/Q (i.e the change along the vertical axis divided by the
change along the horizontal axis). The negative sign of this slope is consistent with the law
of demand.
The demand curve for a good does not have to be linear or a straight line; it can be
curvilinear- meaning its slope may vary along the curve. If the change in quantity demanded
does not follow a constant proportion, then the demand curve will be non linear. However,
linear demand curves provide a convenient tool for analysis.

1.3.2 Market Demand Schedule

The market demand for a commodity gives the alternative amounts of the commodity
demanded per time period, at various alternative prices, by all the buyers in the market. In
other words, it is the total quantity that all the buyers of a commodity are willing to buy per
unit of time at a given price, other things remaining constant. The market demand for a
commodity thus depends on all the factors that determine the individual's demand and, in
addition, on the number of buyers of the commodity in the market.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P1P3LY                  2.13

When we add up the various quantities demanded by different consumers in the market, we
can obtain the market demand schedule. How the summation is done is illustrated in Table
2. Suppose there are only two individual buyers of good X in the market namely, A and B.
The Table 2 shows their individual demand at various prices.

Table 2: Market Demand Schedule of Good X (per day)

                           Quantity demanded by

Price of Good X in (`)  A  B                     Total Market Demand
              0                                                5
             10         3  2                                   3
             20                                                1
             30         2  1                                   0

                        1  0

                        0  0

When we add the quantities demanded at each price by consumers A and B, we get the total
market demand. Thus, when good X is free or price is zero per unit, the market demand for
commodity `X' is 5 units (i.e.3+2). When price rises to ` 10, the market demand is 3 units. At
a price of ` 20, only one unit is demanded in the market. At price ` 30, both A and B do not
buy good X and therefore, market demand is zero. The market demand schedule also
indicates inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded of `X'.

                               Fig. 2: The Market Demand Curve for Good X

1.3.3 The Market Demand Curve

The market demand curve for good X represents the quantities of good X demanded by all
buyers in the market for good X. The market demand curve is obtained by horizontal
summation of all individual demand curves.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.14  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

If we plot the market demand schedule on a graph, we get the market demand curve. Figure
2 shows the market demand curve for commodity `X'. The two consumers A and B have
different individual demand curves corresponding to their different preferences for good X.
The two individual demand curves are shown in Figure 2 along with the market demand
curve for good X. When there are more than two consumers in the market for some good,
the same principle continues to apply and the market demand curve would be the horizontal
summation of all the market participants' individual demand curves. The market demand
curve, like the individual demand curve, slopes downwards to the right because it is nothing
but the lateral summation of individual demand curves.

In addition to the demand schedule and the demand curve, the buyers' demand for a good
can also be expressed algebraically, using a demand equation. The demand equation relates
the price of the good, denoted by P, to the quantity of the good demanded, denoted by Q.

The straight-line demand curve where we hold everything else constant is described by a
linear demand function. We can write a demand function as follows:

                                                   Q = a - bP

Where `a' is the vertical intercept and `b' is the slope.

For example: For a demand function Q = 100 -2P,

                                                   P = a ­ Q : P = 50 ­ Q
                                                   bb          2

1.3.4 Rationale of the Law of Demand

Normally, the demand curves slope downwards. This means people buy more at lower
prices. We shall now try to understand why do demand curves slope downwards? Put in
other words, why do people buy more at lower prices? Different economists have given
different explanations for the operation of the law of demand. These are given below:

(1) Price Effect of a fall in price: The price effect which indicates the way the consumer's
         purchases of good X change, when its price changes, is the sum of its two components
         namely: substitution effect and income effect.

         (a) Substitution effect: Hicks and Allen have explained the law in terms of
                   substitution effect and income effect. The substitution effect describes the
                   change in demand for a product when its relative price changes. When the
                   price of a commodity falls, the price ratio between items change and it
                   becomes relatively cheaper than other commodities. Assuming that the prices
                   of all other commodities remain constant, it induces consumers to substitute

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P1P5LY                    2.15

                   the commodity whose price has fallen for other commodities which have now
                   become relatively expensive. The result is that the total demand for the
                   commodity whose price has fallen increases. This is called substitution effect.
                   When the price falls, the substitution effect is always positive; i.e it will always
                   cause more to be demanded. The substitution effect will be stronger when:

                   (a) the goods are closer substitutes

                   (b) there is lower cost of switching to the substitute good

                   (c) there is lower inconvenience while switching to the substitute good

         (b) Income effect: The increase in demand on account of an increase in real
                   income is known as income effect. When the price of a commodity falls, the
                   consumer can buy the same quantity of the commodity with lesser money or
                   he can buy more of the same commodity with the same amount of money. In
                   other words, as a result of fall in the price of the commodity, consumer's real
                   income or purchasing power increases. A part or whole of the resulting
                   increase in real income can now be used to buy more of the commodity in
                   question, given that the good is normal. Therefore, the demand for that
                   commodity (whose price has fallen) increases. However, there is one
                   exception. In the case of inferior goods, the income effect works in the
                   opposite direction to the substitution effect. In the case of inferior goods, the
                   expansion in demand due to a price fall will take place only if the substitution
                   effect outweighs the income effect.

(2) Utility maximising behaviour of Consumers: A consumer is in equilibrium (i.e.
         maximises his satisfaction) when the marginal utility of the commodity and its price
         equalize. According to Marshall, the consumer has diminishing utility for each
         additional unit of a commodity and therefore, he will be willing to pay only less for
         each additional unit. A rational consumer will not pay more for lesser satisfaction. He
         is induced to buy additional units only when the prices are lower. The operation of
         diminishing marginal utility and the act of the consumer to equalize the utility of the
         commodity with its price result in a downward sloping demand curve.

(3) Arrival of new consumers: When the price of a commodity falls, more consumers
         start buying it because some of those who could not afford to buy it earlier may now
         be able to buy it. This raises the number of consumers of a commodity at a lower
         price and hence the demand for the commodity in question increases.

(4) Different uses: Many commodities have multiple uses. When the price of such
         commodities are high (or rises) they will be put to limited uses only. If the prices of
         such commodities fall, they will be put to more number of uses and therefore their

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.16  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         demand will increase. Thus, the increase in the number of uses consequent to a fall in
         price make the buyer demand more of such commodities making the demand curve
         slope downwards. For example: Electricity

1.3.5 Exceptions to the Law of Demand

According to the law of demand, other things being equal, more of a commodity will be
demanded at lower prices than at higher prices. The law of demand is valid in most cases;
however there are certain cases where this law does not hold good. The following are the
important exceptions to the law of demand.

(i) Conspicuous goods: Articles of prestige value or snob appeal or articles of
         conspicuous consumption are used by the rich people as status symbol for
         enhancing their social prestige or /and for displaying wealth. These articles will not
         conform to the usual law of demand as they become more attractive only if their
         prices are high or keep going up. This was found out by Veblen in his doctrine of
         "Conspicuous Consumption" and hence this effect is called Veblen effect or prestige
         goods effect. Veblen effect takes place as some consumers measure the utility of a
         commodity by its price i.e., if the commodity is expensive they think that it has got
         more utility. As such, they buy less of this commodity at low price and more of it at
         high price. Diamonds are often given as an example of this case. Higher the price of
         diamonds, higher is the prestige value attached to them and hence higher is the
         demand.

(ii) Giffen goods: Sir Robert Giffen, a Scottish economist and statistician, was surprised
         to find out that as the price of bread increased, the British workers purchased more
         bread and not less of it. This was something against the law of demand. Why did this
         happen? The reason given for this is that, when the price of bread went up, it caused
         such a large decline in the purchasing power of the poor people that they were
         forced to cut down the consumption of meat and other more expensive foods. Since
         bread, even when its price was higher than before, was still the cheapest food article,
         people consumed more of it and not less when its price went up.

         Such goods which exhibit direct price-demand relationship are called `Giffen goods'.
         Generally those goods which are inferior, with no close substitutes available and
         which occupy a substantial place in consumers' budget are called `Giffen goods'. All
         Giffen goods are inferior goods; but all inferior goods are not Giffen goods. Examples
         of Giffen goods are coarse grains like bajra, low quality rice and wheat etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P1P7LY                    2.17

(iii) Conspicuous necessities: The demand for certain goods is affected by the
         demonstration effect of the consumption pattern of a social group to which an
         individual belongs. These goods, due to their constant usage, become necessities of
         life. For example, in spite of the fact that the prices of television sets, refrigerators,
         air-conditioners etc. have been continuously rising, their demand does not show any
         tendency to fall.

(iv) Future expectations about prices: It has been observed that when the prices are
         rising, households, expecting that the prices in the future will be even higher, tend to
         buy larger quantities of such commodities. For example, when there is wide-spread
         drought, people expect that prices of food grains would rise in future. They demand
         greater quantities of food grains even as their price rises. On the contrary, if prices
         are falling and people anticipate further fall, rather than buying more, they postpone
         their purchases. However, it is to be noted that here it is not the law of demand
         which is invalidated. There is a change in one of the factors which was held constant
         while deriving the law of demand, namely change in the price expectations of the
         people.

(v) Incomplete information and irrational behaviour: The law has been derived
         assuming consumers to be rational and knowledgeable about market-conditions.
         However, at times, consumers have incomplete information and therefore make
         inconsistent decisions regarding purchases. Similarly, in practice, a household may
         demand larger quantity of a commodity even at a higher price because it may be
         ignorant of the ruling price of the commodity. Under such circumstances, the law will
         not remain valid.

         Sometimes, consumers tend to be irrational and make impulsive purchases without
         any rational calculations about the price and usefulness of the product and in such
         contexts the law of demand fails.

(vi) Demand for necessaries: The law of demand does not apply much in the case of
         necessaries of life. Irrespective of price changes, people have to consume the
         minimum quantities of necessary commodities.

(vii) Speculative goods: In the speculative market, particularly in the market for stocks
         and shares, more will be demanded when the prices are rising and less will be
         demanded when prices decline.

The law of demand will also fail if there is any significant change in other factors on which
demand of a commodity depends. If there is a change in income of the household, or in the
prices of related commodities or in tastes and fashion etc., the inverse demand and price
relation may not hold good.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.18  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

    1.4 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OFDEMAND

The demand schedule, demand curve and the law of demand all show that when the price of
a commodity falls, its quantity demanded increases, other things being equal. When, as a
result of decrease in price, the quantity demanded increases, in Economics, we say that there
is an expansion of demand and when, as a result of increase in price, the quantity demanded
decreases, we say that there is a contraction of demand. For example, suppose the price of
apples is ` 100/ per kilogram and a consumer buys one kilogram at that price. Now, if other
things such as income, prices of other goods and tastes of the consumers remain the same
but the price of apples falls to ` 80 per kilogram and the consumer now buys two kilograms
of apples, we say that there is a change in quantity demanded or there is an expansion of
demand. On the contrary, if the price of apples rises to ` 150 per kilogram and the consumer
then buys only half a kilogram, we say that there is a contraction of demand.

The phenomena of expansion and contraction of demand are shown in Figure 3. The figure
shows that when price is OP, the quantity demanded is OM, given other things equal. When
as a result of increase in price (O PII), the quantity demanded falls to OL, we say that there is
`a fall in quantity demanded' or `contraction of demand' or `an upward movement along the
same demand curve'. Similarly, as a result of fall in price to OPI, the quantity demanded rises
to ON, we say that there is an `expansion of demand' or `a rise in quantity demanded' or `a
downward movement on the same demand curve.'

                              Fig. 3: Expansion and Contraction of Demand

1.4.1 Increase and Decrease in Demand

Till now we have assumed that the other determinants of demand remain constant when we
are analysing the demand for a commodity. It should be noted that expansion and
contraction of demand take place as a result of changes in the price while all other

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P1P9LY     2.19

determinants of price viz. income, tastes, propensity to consume and price of related goods
remain constant. The `other factors remaining constant' means that the position of the
demand curve remains the same and the consumer moves downwards or upwards on it.

There are factors other than price (non-price factors) or conditions of demand which might
cause either an increase or decrease in the quantity of a particular good or service that
buyers are prepared to demand at a given price. What happens if there is a change in
consumers' tastes and preferences, income, the prices of the related goods or other factors
on which demand depends? As an example, let us consider what happens to the demand for
commodity X if the consumer's income increases:

Table 3 shows the possible effect of an increase in income of the consumer on the quantity
demanded of commodity X.

      Table 3: Two demand schedules for commodity X

   Price   Quantity of `X' demanded      Quantity of `X' demanded
    (`)     when average household        when average household
          income is ` 5,000 per month  income is ` 10,000 per month

A  5      10                           15            A1

B  4      15                           20            B1

C  3      20                           25            C1

D  2      35                           40            D1

E  1      60                           65            E1

                Fig. 4: Figure Showing Two Demand Curves at Different Incomes
The two sets of data are plotted in Figure 4 as DD pertaining to demand when average
household income is ` 5000/ and D'D' when income is ` 10, 000/. We find that with increase
in income, the demand curve for X has shifted [in this case it has shifted to the right]. The
shift from DD to D'D' indicates an increase in the desire to purchase `X' at each possible

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.20                           BUSINESS ECONOMICS

price. For example, at the price of ` 4 per unit, 15 units are demanded when average
household income is ` 5,000 per month. When the average household income rises to
` 10,000 per month, 20 units of X are demanded at price ` 4. You can find similar increase in
demand at each price. Since this increase would occur regardless of what the market price is,
the result would be a shift to the right of the entire demand curve.

Alternatively, we can ask what price consumers would be willing to pay to purchase a given
quantity, say 15 units of X. With greater income, they should be willing to pay a higher price
of ` 5 instead of 4. A rise in income thus shifts the demand curve to the right, whereas a fall
in income will have the opposite effect of shifting the demand curve to the left.

Any change that increases the quantity demanded at every price shifts the demand curve to
the right and is called an increase in demand. Any change that decreases the quantity
demanded at every price shifts the demand curve to the left, and is called a decrease in
demand.

Figure 5(a) and (b) illustrate increase and decrease in demand respectively. When there is an
increase in demand, the demand curve shifts to the right and more quantity will be
purchased at a given price (Q1 instead of Q at price P). A decrease in demand causes the
entire demand curve to shift to the left and we find that less quantity is bought at the same
price P.

Fig. 5(a): Rightward shift in the                  Fig. 5(b): Leftward shift in the
            demand Curve                                      demand Curve

The table below summarises the effect of non - price determinants on demand

Changes in determinants other than price Changes in determinants other than price that

that cause increase in demand                      cause Decrease in Demand (Leftward shift of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P2P1LY                                  2.21

(Rightward shift of demand curvewhen demand curvewhen less is demanded at each

more is demanded at each price)                    price)

Rise in income in the case of normal A fall in income in case of normal goods, and a

goods                                              rise in income in case of inferior goods

Increase in wealth in the case of normal Decrease in wealth in case of normal goods, and

goods                                              an increase in wealth in case of inferior goods

Rise in the price of a substitute good             Fall in the price of a substitute good

Fall in the price of a complement                  Rise in the price of a complement

An increase in the number of buyers                A decrease in the number of buyers

A change in tastes in favour of the A change in tastes against the commodity
commodity

A redistribution of income to groups of Redistribution of income away from groups of

people who favour the commodity                    people who favour the commodity.

An expectation that price will rise in the An expectation that price will fall in the future
future

Government policies encouraging Government                 regulations                     discouraging

consumptionof the good Eg. Grant of consumption e.g. ban on cigarette smoking /

consumer subsidies                                 ban on consumption.

1.4.2 Movements along the Demand Curve vs. Shift of Demand
       Curve

It is important for the business decision-makers to understand the distinction between a
movement along a demand curve and a shift of the whole demand curve.

A movement along the demand curve indicates changes in the quantity demanded because
of price changes, other factors remaining constant. A shift of the demand curve indicates
that there is a change in demand at each possible price because one or more other factors,
such as incomes, tastes or the price of some other goods, have changed.

Thus, when an economist speaks of an increase or a decrease in demand, he refers to a shift
of the whole curve because one or more of the factors which were assumed to remain
constant earlier have changed. When the economists speak of change in quantity demanded
he means movement along the same curve (i.e., expansion or contraction of demand) which
has happened due to fall or rise in price of the commodity.

In short `change in demand' represents shift of the demand curve to right or left resulting
from changes in factors such as income, tastes, prices of other goods etc. and `change in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.22  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

quantity demanded' represents movement upwards or downwards on the same demand
curve resulting from a change in the price of the commodity.

When demand increases due to factors other than price, firms can sell more at the existing
prices resulting in increased revenue. The objective of advertisements and all other sales
promotion activities by any firm is to shift the demand curve to the right and to reduce the
elasticity of demand. (The latter will be discussed in the next section). However, the
additional demand is not free of cost as firms have to incur expenditure on advertisement
and sales promotion devices.

    1.5 ELASTICITY OF DEMAND

Till now we were concerned with the direction of the changes in prices and quantities
demanded. From the point of view of a business firm, it is more important to know the extent of
the relationship or the degree of responsiveness of demand to changes in its determinants.

Often, we would want to know how sensitive is the demand for a product to its price; for
example, if price increases by 5 percent, how much will the quantities demanded change?
Also, how much change in demand will be there if the average income rises by 5 percent?
What effect will an advertising campaign have on sales? Economists use a number of
different types of elasticity to answer questions like these so as to make demand predictions
and to recommend changes in strategies.

Consider the following situations:

(1) As a result of a fall in the price of headphones from ` 500 to ` 400, the quantity
         demanded increases from 100headphones to 150 headphones.

(2) As a result of fall in the price of wheat from ` 20 per kilogram to ` 18 per kilogram,
         the quantity demanded increases from 500 kilograms to 520 kilograms.

(3) As a result of fall in the price of salt from ` 9 per kilogram to ` 7.50, the quantity
         demanded increases from 1000 kilogram to 1005 kilograms.

What do you notice? You notice that the demand for headphones, wheat and salt responds
in the same direction to price changes. The difference lies in the degree of response of
demand. The differences in responsiveness of demand can be found out by comparing the
percentage changes in prices and quantities demanded. Here lies the concept of elasticity.

The amount of a commodity purchased is a function of many variables such as price of the
commodity, prices of the related commodities, income of the consumers and other factors

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P2P3LY                    2.23

on which demand depends. A change in one of these independent variables will cause a
change in the dependent variable, namely, the amount purchased per unit of time. The
elasticity of demand measures the relative responsiveness of the amount purchased per unit
of time to a change in any one of these independent variables while keeping others
constant. In general, the coefficient of elasticity is defined as the proportionate change in
the dependent variable divided by the proportionate change in the independent variable.

Elasticity of demand is defined as the degree of responsiveness of the quantity demanded
of a good to changes in one of the variables on which demand depends. More precisely,
elasticity of demand is the percentage change in quantity demanded divided by the
percentage change in one of the variables on which demand depends.

We may find different measures of elasticity such as price elasticity, cross elasticity, income
elasticity, advertisement elasticity and elasticity of substitution. It is to be noted that when
we talk of elasticity of demand, unless and until otherwise mentioned, we talk of price
elasticity of demand. In other words, it is price elasticity of demand which is usually referred
to as elasticity of demand.

1.5.1 Price Elasticity of Demand

Perhaps, the most important measure of elasticity of demand is the price elasticity of
demand which measures the sensitivity of quantity demanded to `own price' or the price of
the good itself. The concept of price elasticity of demand is important for a firm for two
reasons.

 Knowledge of the nature and degree of price elasticity allows firms to predict the impact
         of price changes on its sales.

 Price elasticity guides the firm's profit-maximizing pricing decisions.

Price elasticity of demand expresses the degree of responsiveness of quantity demanded of
a good to a change in its price, given the consumer's income, his tastes and prices of all
other goods. In other words, it is measured as the percentage change in quantity demanded
divided by the percentage change in price, other things remaining equal. The price elasticity
of demand (also referred to as PED) tells us the percentage change in quantity demanded
for each one percent (1%) change in price. That is,

                              Price Elasticity =Ep= % change in quantity demaned
                                                                   % change inPrice

The percentage change in a variable is just the absolute change in the variable divided by
the original level of the variable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            2.24   BUSINESS ECONOMICS

Therefore,

                                                   Change in quantity ×100
                                                   Original Quantity
                   Ep =                             Change inPrice×100

                                                   Original Price

                   OR Ep= Change in quantity × OriginalPrice
                                Original Quantity Change inprice

In symbolic terms

                                                   Ep= q× p = q×p
                                                          q p p q

Where Ep    stands for price elasticity
         q  stands for original quantity
         p  stands for original price
            stands for a change.

A negative sign on the elasticity of demand illustrates the law of demand: less quantity is
demanded as the price rises. Notice that the change in quantity was due solely to the price
change. The other factors that potentially could affect sales (income and the competitor's
price) did not change.

The greater the value of elasticity, the more sensitive quantity demanded is to price. Strictly
speaking, the value of price elasticity varies from minus infinity to approach zero. This is
because q has a negative sign. In other words, since price and quantity are inversely related

            p

(with a few exceptions) price elasticity is negative.

While interpreting the coefficient of price elasticity, we consider only the magnitude of the
price elasticity- i.e. its absolute size. For example, if Ep = -1.22, we say that the elasticity is
1.22 in magnitude. That is, we ignore the negative sign and consider only the numerical
value of the elasticity. Thus if a 1% change in price leads to 2% change in quantity
demanded of good A and 4% change in quantity demanded of good B, then we get
elasticity of A and B as 2 and 4 respectively, showing that demand for B is more elastic or
responsive to price changes than that of A. Had we considered minus signs, we would have
concluded that the demand for A is more elastic than that for B, which is not correct. Hence,
by convention, we take the absolute value of price elasticity and draw conclusions.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P2P5LY                      2.25

A numerical example for price elasticity of demand:

ILLUSTRATION 1

The price of a commodity decreases from ` 6 to ` 4 and quantity demanded of the good increases
from 10 units to 15 units. Find the coefficient of price elasticity.

SOLUTION
Price elasticity = (-)  q /  p × p/q = 5/2 × 6/10 = (-) 1.5

ILLUSTRATION 2

A 5% fall in the price of a good leads to a 15% rise in its demand. Determine the elasticity and
comment on its value.

SOLUTION

          Price Elasticity =Ep= % change in quantity demanded
                                               % change inPrice

                                   = 15% / 5% = 3

Comment: The good in question has elastic demand.

ILLUSTRATION 3

The price of a good decreases from ` 100 to ` 60 per unit. If the price elasticity of demand for
it is 1.5 and the original quantity demanded is 30 units, calculate the new quantity demanded.

SOLUTION

                                                   Ep = q × p
                                                         p q

Here                               1.5= q×100 =18
                                          40 30

Therefore new quantity demanded = 30+18 = 48 units

ILLUSTRATION 4

The quantity demanded by a consumer at price ` 9 per unit is 800 units. Its price falls by 25% and
quantity demanded rises by 160 units. Calculate its price elasticity of demand.

SOLUTION
Change in quantity demanded = 160

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          2.26           BUSINESS ECONOMICS

Therefore, % change in quantity demanded = = 20%

% change in price = 25%

                         Ed = % changein q
                                % change inp

                         Ea                        =  20 = 0.8
                                                      25

ILLUSTRATION 5

A consumer buys 80 units of a good at a price of ` 4 per unit. Suppose price elasticity of demand is
- 4. At what price will he buy 60 units?

SOLUTION                 Ed = q×p
                                 p q
Or
Or                        4 = 20 × 4
                                 x ­ 4 80

                          4= 1
                                 x­4

                          x = 4.2 per unit

1.5.2 Point Elasticity

The point elasticity of demand is the price elasticity of demand at a particular point on the
demand curve. The concept of point elasticity is used for measuring price elasticity where
the change in price is infinitesimal. Price elasticity is a key element in applying marginal
analysis to determine optimal prices. Since marginal analysis works by evaluating "small"
changes taken with respect to an initial decision, it is useful to measure elasticity with
respect to an infinitesimally small change in price.

Point elasticity makes use of derivative rather than finite changes in price and quantity. It
may be defined as:

                                                        Ep = ­dq × p
                                                               dp q

Where dq is the derivative of quantity with respect to price at a point on the demand curve,
         dp

and p and q are the price and quantity at that point. Economists generally use the word

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P2P7LY  2.27
"elasticity" to refer to point elasticity.

                                                Fig 6: Point Elasticity
Point elasticity is, therefore, the product of price quantity ratio at a particular point on the
demand curve and the reciprocal of the slope of the demand line.

1.5.3 Measurement of Elasticity on a Linear Demand Curve ­
       Geometric Method

By definition, the price elasticity of demand is the change in quantity associated with a
change in price (Q/P) times the ratio of price to quantity (P/Q) Therefore, the price
elasticity of demand depends not only on the slope of the demand curve but also on the
price and quantity. The elasticity, therefore, varies along the curve as price and quantity
change. The slope of a linear demand curve is constant. However, the elasticity at different
points on a linear demand curve would be different. When price is high price is high and
quantity is small, the elasticity is high. The elasticity becomes smaller as we move down the
curve.
Given a straight line demand curve tT, (Fig.6 above) point elasticity at any point say R can be
found by using the formula

                                                   RT = lower segment
                                                   Rt upper segment
Using the above formula we can get elasticity at various points on the demand curve.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.28  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

                      Fig .7: Elasticity at Different Points on the Demand Curve
Thus, we see that as we move from T towards t, elasticity goes on increasing. At the mid-
point it is equal to one, at point t, it is infinity and at T it is zero.

1.5.4 Arc-Elasticity

Often we may be required to calculate price elasticity over some portion of the demand
curve rather than at a single point. In other words, the elasticity may be calculated over a
range of prices. When price and quantity changes are discrete and large we have to measure
elasticity over an arc of the demand curve.
When price elasticity is to be found between two prices (or two points on the demand curve
say, A and B in figure 8) the question arises as to which price and quantity should be taken
as base. This is because elasticity found by using original price and quantity figures as base
will be different from the one derived by using new price and quantity figures. Therefore, in
order to avoid confusion, rather than choose the initial or the final price and quantity, the
mid-point method is used i.e. the averages of the two prices and quantities are taken as (i.e.
original and new) base. The midpoint formula is an approximation to the actual percentage
change in a variable, but it has the advantage of consistent elasticity values when price
moves in either directions.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P2P9LY                         2.29

                                Fig. 8: Arc Elasticity

The arc elasticity can be found out by using the formula: We drop the minus sign and use
the absolute value.

                                                   Q2 ­ Q1

                         Ep  =  (Q2 +Q1) / 2
                                   P2 ­ P1

                                (P2 +P1) / 2

                         Ep = Q2 ­ Q1 ×P2 +P1

                                  Q2 +Q1 P2 ­ P1

WhereP1, Q1 are the original price and quantity and P2, Q2 are the new ones.

Thus, if we have to find elasticity of demand for headphones between:

    P1= ` 500 Q1= 100

    P2 = ` 400 Q2= 150

We will use the formula  Ep = Q2 ­ Q1 ×P2 +P1
Or
                                  Q2 +Q1 P2 ­ P1
                         Ep = 50 ×900

                                 250 100

or                       Ep =1.8

The arc elasticity will always lie somewhere (but not necessarily in the middle) between the point
elasticities calculated at the lower and the higher prices.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.30  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

1.5.5 Interpretation of the Numerical Values of Elasticity of
       Demand

Economists have found it useful to divide the demand behaviour into different categories, based
on values of price elasticity. Since we draw demand curves with price on the vertical axis and
quantity on the horizontal axis, Q/P = (1/slope of curve). As a result, for any price and
quantity combination, the steeper the slope of the curve, the less elastic is demand.

The numerical value of elasticity of demand can assume any value between zero and infinity.

Elasticity is zero, (Ep= 0) if there is no change at all in the quantity demanded when price
changes i.e. when the quantity demanded does not respond at all to a price change. In other
words, any change in price leaves the quantity demanded unchanged and consumers will buy a
fixed quantity of a good regardless of its price. Perfectly inelastic demand is as an extreme case
of price insensitivity and is therefore only a theoretical category with less practical significance.
The vertical demand curve in figure 8(a) represents perfectly or completely inelastic demand,

Elasticity is one, or unitary, (Ep= 1) if the percentage change in quantity demanded is equal to
the percentage change in price. Figure 8 (b) shows special case of unit-elastic demand, where
the demand curve is a rectangular hyperbola.

Elasticity is greater than one (Ep > 1) when the percentage change in quantity demanded is
greater than the percentage change in price. In such a case, demand is said to be elastic.
[Figure8 (d)]. In other words, the quantity demanded is relatively sensitive to price changes.
When drawn, the elastic demand line is fairly flat.

Elasticity is less than one (Ep < 1) when the percentage change in quantity demanded is less
than the percentage change in price. In such a case, demand is said to be inelastic.[Figure 8
(e)]In this situation, when price falls the buyers are unable or unwilling to significantly
contract demand. In other words, the quantity demanded is relatively insensitive to price
changes. When drawn, the inelastic demand line is fairly steep.

Elasticity is infinite, (Ep= ) when a `small price reduction raises the demand from zero to

infinity. The demand curve is horizontal at the price level (where the demand curve touches
the vertical axis). As long as the price stays at one particular level any quantity might be
demanded. Moving back and forth along this line, we find that there is a change in the
quantity demanded but no change in the price. If there is a slight increase in price, they
would not buy anything from the particular seller. That is, even the smallest price rise would
cause quantity demanded to fall to zero. Roughly speaking, when you divide a number by

zero, you get infinity, denoted by the symbol. So a horizontal demand curve implies an

infinite price elasticity of demand. This type of demand curve is found in a perfectly

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P3P1LY             2.31

competitive market. The horizontal demand curve in figure 8 (c) represents perfectly or
infinitely elastic demand,

          Table 4 : Elasticity Measures, Meaning and Nomenclature

Numerical measure of         Verbal description             Terminology
         elasticity

Zero                  Quantity demanded does not Perfectly (or completely)

                      change as price changes         inelastic

Greater than zero, but less Quantity demanded changes by a Inelastic

than one              smaller percentage than does

                      price

One                   Quantity demanded changes by Unit elasticity

                      exactly the same percentage as

                      does price

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               2.32  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

Greater than one, but less Quantity demanded changes by a Elastic

than infinity        larger percentage than does price

Infinity             Purchasers are prepared to buy all Perfectly (or infinitely)
                     they can obtain at some price and elastic
                     none at all at an even slightly
                     higher price

Now that we are able to classify goods according to their price elasticity, let us see whether
the goods mentioned below are price elastic or inelastic.

 Sl. Name of the                 Calculation of Elasticity   Nature of Elasticity
No. Commodity                     Ep = Q2 ­ Q1×P2 +P1
                                                            Elastic
1. Headphones                             Q2 +Q1 P2 ­ P1    Inelastic
2. Wheat             100-150 ×500+400 =1.8>1                Inelastic
3. Common Salt       100+150 500- 400
                     500-520 ×20+18 = 0.37<1
                     500+520 20-18
                     1000-1005 ×9+7.50 = 0.02743<1
                     1000+1005 9-7.50

What do we note in the above hypothetical example? We note that the demand for headphones
is quite elastic, while demand for wheat is quite inelastic and the demand for salt is almost the
same even after a reduction in price.

The price elasticity of demand for the vast majority of goods is somewhere between the two
extreme cases of zero and infinity. Generally, in real world situations also, we find that the
demand for goods like refrigerators, TVs, laptops, fans, etc. is elastic; the demand for goods
like wheat and rice is inelastic; and the demand for salt is highly inelastic or perfectly
inelastic. Why do we find such a difference in the behaviour of consumers in respect of
different commodities? We shall explain later at length those factors which are responsible
for the differences in elasticity of demand for various goods. Before that, we will consider
another method of calculating price-elasticity which is called total outlay method.

1.5.6 Total Outlay Method of Calculating Price Elasticity

The price elasticity of demand for a commodity and the total expenditure or outlay made on
it are significantly related to each other. As the total expenditure (price of the commodity
multiplied by the quantity of that commodity purchased) made on a commodity is the total
revenue received by the seller (price of the commodity multiplied by quantity of that

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P3P3LY                    2.33

commodity sold of that commodity), we can say that the price elasticity and total revenue
received are closely related to each other. By analysing the changes in total expenditure (or
total revenue) in response to a change in the price of the commodity, we can know the price
elasticity of demand for it.

Price Elasticity of demand equals one or Unity: When, as a result of the change in price
of a good, the total expenditure on the good or the total revenue received from that good
remains the same, the price elasticity for the good is equal to unity. This is because the total
expenditure made on the good can remain the same only if the proportional change in
quantity demanded is equal to the proportional change in price. Thus, if there is a given
percentage increase (or decrease) in the price of a good and if the price elasticity is unitary,
total expenditure of the buyer on the good or the total revenue received from it will remain
unchanged.

Price elasticity of demand is greater than unity: When, as a result of increase in the price
of a good, the total expenditure made on the good or the total revenue received from that
good falls or when as a result of decrease in price, the total expenditure made on the good
or total revenue received from that good increases, we say that price elasticity of demand is
greater than unity. In our example of headphones, as a result of fall in price of headphones
from ` 500 to ` 400, the total revenue received from headphones increases from ` 50,000
(500x100) to ` 60,000 (400 x 150), indicating elastic demand for headphones. Similarly, had
the price of headphones increased from ` 400 to ` 500, the demand would have fallen from
150 to 100 indicating a fall in the total revenue received from ` 60,000 to ` 50,000 showing
elastic demand for headphones.

Price elasticity of demand is less than unity: When, as a result of increase in the price of a
good, the total expenditure made on the good or the total revenue received from that good
increases or when as a result of decrease in its price, the total expenditure made on the
good or the total revenue received from that good falls, we say that the price elasticity of
demand is less than unity. In the example of wheat above, as a result of fall in the price of
wheat from ` 20 per kg. to ` 18 per kg. the total revenue received from wheat falls from
` 10,000 (20 x 500) to ` 9360 (18 x 520) indicating inelastic demand for wheat. Similarly, we
can show that as a result of increase in the price of wheat from ` 18 to ` 20 per kg, the total
revenue received from wheat increase from ` 9360 to ` 10,000 indicating inelastic demand
for wheat.

The main drawback of this method is that by using this we can only say whether the demand
for a good is elastic or inelastic; we cannot find out the exact coefficient of price elasticity.

Why should a business firm be concerned about elasticity of demand? The reason is that the
degree of elasticity of demand predicts how changes in the price of a good will affect the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.34  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

total revenue earned by the producers from the sale of that good. The total revenue is
defined as the total value of sales of a good or service. It is equal to the price multiplied by
the quantity sold.

1.5.7 Total Revenue

                                    Total revenue (TR) = Price × Quantity sold

Except in the rare case of a good with perfectly elastic or perfectly inelastic demand, when a
seller raises the price of a good, there are two effects which act in opposite directions on
revenue.

 Price effect: After a price increase (decrease), each unit sold sells at a higher (lower)
         price, which tends to raise (lower) the revenue.

 Quantity effect: After a price increase (decrease), fewer (more) units are sold, which
         tends to lower (increase) the revenue.

What will be the net effect on total revenue? It depends on which effect is stronger. If the
price effect which tends to raise total revenue is the stronger of the two effects, then total
revenue goes up. If the quantity effect, which tends to reduce total revenue, is the stronger,
then total revenue goes down.

The price elasticity of demand tells us what happens to the total revenue when price
changes: its size determines which effect, the price effect or the quantity effect, is stronger.

If demand for a good is unit-elastic (the price elasticity of demand is equal to one; Figure 9),
an increase in price or decrease in price does not change total revenue. In this case, the
quantity effect and the price effect exactly balance each other. When price rises from P to
P1, the gain in revenue (Area A) is equal to loss in revenue due to lost sales (Area B)

                                Figure 9: Total revenue when Elasticity = 1
If demand for a good is inelastic (the price elasticity of demand is less than one), a higher
price increases total revenue. In this case, the quantity effect is weaker than the price effect.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P3P5LY                    2.35

On the contrary, when demand is inelastic, a fall in price reduces total revenue because the
quantity effect is dominated by the price effect. Refer Figure 8 (e) above.

If demand for a good is elastic (the price elasticity of demand is greater than one), an
increase in price reduces total revenue and a fall in price increases total revenue. In this ca se,
the quantity effect is stronger than the price effect. Refer Figure 8 (d) above.

Table 5 below summarizes the relationship between price elasticity and total revenue.

Table 5: The Relationship between Price elasticity and Total Revenue (TR)

Price increase             Elastic                 Demand                              Inelastic
Price decrease  TR Decreases                                    Unitary Elastic  TR Increases
                TR Increases                                                     TR Decreases
                                                           TR remains same
                                                           TR remains same

1.5.8 Determinants of Price Elasticity of Demand

In the above section we have explained what price elasticity is and how it is measured. Now
an important question is: What are the factors which determine whether the demand for a
good is elastic or inelastic? We will consider the following important determinants of price
elasticity.

(1) Availability of substitutes: One of the most important determinants of elasticity is
         the degree of substitutability and the extent of availability of substitutes. Some
         commodities like butter, cabbage, car, soft drink etc. have close substitutes. These
         are margarine, other green vegetables, other brands of cars, other brands of cold
         drinks respectively. A change in the price of these commodities, the prices of the
         substitutes remaining constant, can be expected to cause quite substantial
         substitution ­ a fall in price leading consumers to buy more of the commodity in
         question and a rise in price leading consumers to buy more of the substitutes.

         Commodities such as salt, housing, and all vegetables taken together, have few, if
         any, satisfactory substitutes and a rise in their prices may cause a smaller fall in their
         quantity demanded. Thus, we can say that goods which typically have close or perfect
         substitutes have highly elastic demand curves. Moreover, wider the range of
         substitutes available, the greater will be the elasticity. For example, toilet soaps,
         toothpastes etc have wide variety of brands and each brand is a close substitute for
         the other.

         It should be noted that while as a group, a good or service may have inelastic
         demand, but when we consider its various brands, we say that a particular brand has

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.36  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         elastic demand. Thus, while the demand for a generic good like petrol is inelastic, the
         demand for Indian Oil's petrol is elastic. Similarly, while there are no general
         substitutes for health care, there are substitutes for one doctor or hospital. Likewise,
         the demand for common salt and sugar is inelastic because good substitutes are not
         available for these.

(2) Position of a commodity in the consumer's budget: The greater the proportion of
         income spent on a commodity; generally the greater will be its elasticity of demand
         and vice- versa. The demand for goods like common salt, matches, buttons, etc. tend
         to be highly inelastic because a household spends only a fraction of their income on
         each of them. On the other hand, demand for goods like rental apartments and
         clothing tends to be elastic since households generally spend a good part of their
         income on them. When the good absorbs a significant share of consumers' income, it
         is worth their time and effort to find a way to reduce their demand when the price
         goes up.

(3) Nature of the need that a commodity satisfies: In general, luxury goods are price
         elastic because one can easily live without a luxury. In contrast, necessities are price
         inelastic. Thus, while the demand for a home theatre is relatively elastic, the demand
         for food and housing, in general, is inelastic. If it is possible to postpone the
         consumption of a particular good, such good will have elastic demand. Consumption
         of necessary goods cannot be postponed and therefore, their demand is inelastic.

(4) Number of uses to which a commodity can be put: The more the possible uses of
         a commodity, the greater will be its price elasticity and vice versa. When the price of
         a commodity which has multiple uses decreases, people tend to extend their
         consumption to its other uses. To illustrate, milk has several uses. If its price falls, it
         can be used for a variety of purposes like preparation of curd, cream, ghee and
         sweets. But, if its price increases, its use will be restricted only to essential purposes
         like feeding the children and sick persons.

(5) Time period: The longer the time-period one has, the more completely one can
         adjust. Time gives buyers the opportunity to find alternatives or substitutes, or
         change their habits. A simple example of the effect can be seen in motoring habits. In
         response to a higher petrol price, one can, in the short run, make fewer trips by car.
         In the longer run, not only can one make fewer trips, but he can purchase a car with a
         smaller engine capacity when the time comes for replacing the existing one. Hence
         one's demand for petrol falls by more when one has made long term adjustments to
         higher prices.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P3P7LY                    2.37

(6) Consumer habits: If a person is a habitual consumer of a commodity, no matter how
         much its price change, the demand for the commodity will be inelastic. If buyers have
         rigid preferences demand will be less price elastic.

(7) Tied demand: The demand for those goods which are tied to others is normally
         inelastic as against those whose demand is of autonomous nature. For example
         printers and ink cartridges.

(8) Price range: Goods which are in very high price range or in very low price range have
         inelastic demand, but those in the middle range have elastic demand.

(9) Minor complementary items: The demand for cheap, complementary items to be
         used together with a costlier product will tend to have an inelastic demand.

         Knowledge of the price elasticity of demand and the factors that may change it is of
         key importance to business managers because it helps them recognise the effect of a
         price change on their total sales and revenues. Firms aim to maximise their profits
         and their pricing strategy is highly decisive in attaining their goals. Knowledge of the
         price elasticity of demand for the goods they sell helps them in arriving at an optimal
         pricing strategy.

         If the demand for a firm's product is relatively elastic, the managers need to
         recognize that lowering the price would expand the volume of sales and result in an
         increase in total revenue. On the contrary, when the demand is elastic, they have to
         be very cautious about increasing prices because a price increase will lead to a
         decline in total revenue as fall in sales would be more than proportionate. If the firm
         finds that the demand for their product is relatively inelastic, the firm may safely
         increase the price and thereby increase its total revenue as they can be assured of
         the fact that the fall in sales on account of a price rise would be less than
         proportionate.

         Knowledge of price elasticity of demand is important for governments while
         determining the prices of goods and services provided by them, such as, transport
         and telecommunication. Further, it also helps the governments to understand the
         nature of responsiveness of demand to increase in prices on account of additional
         taxes and the implications of such responses on the tax revenues. Elasticity of
         demand explains why the governments are inclined to raise the indirect taxes on
         those goods that have a relatively inelastic demand, such as alcohol and tobacco
         products.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.38  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

1.6 INCOME ELASTICITY OF DEMAND

The income elasticity of demand is a measure of how much the demand for a good is
affected by changes in consumers' incomes. Estimates of income elasticity of demand are
useful for businesses to predict the possible growth in sales as the average incomes of
consumers grow over time.

Income elasticity of demand is the degree of responsiveness of the quantity demanded of a
good to changes in the income of consumers. In symbolic form,

      Ei  =  Percentge change in demand
             Percentge change in income

This can be given mathematically as follows:

                                                   Ei  =  Q  ÷  Y
                                                          Q     Y

                                                   = Q × Y
                                                      Q Y

                                                   Ei  =  Q  ×  Y
                                                          Y     Q

Ei = Income elasticity of demand

Q = Change in demand

Q = Original demand

Y = Original money income

Y = Change in money income

There is a useful relationship between income elasticity for a good and the proportion of
income spent on it. The relationship between the two is described in the following three
propositions:

1. If the proportion of income spent on a good remains the same as income increases,
         then income elasticity for that good is equal to one.

2. If the proportion of income spent on a good increase as income increases, then the
         income elasticity for that good is greater than one. The demand for such goods
         increase faster than the rate of increase in income

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P3P9LY                  2.39

3. If the proportion of income spent on a good decrease as income rises, then income
         elasticity for the good is positive but less than one. The demand for income-inelastic
         goods rises, but substantially slowly compared to the rate of increase in income.
         Necessities such as food and medicines tend to be income- inelastic

The above stated propositions can be better understood with the help of the below
example:

Let, the price of a commodity is ` 10 per unit. Initially the consumer's income is ` 100 and he
spends @10% of his income i.e. ` 10 on the commodity demanding 1 unit of the same. Now,
as the consumer's income doubled to `200 (or increased by 100%), there may be three
possibilities causing different degrees of income elasticity of demand as follows:

CASES               Proportion Expenditure Quantity Income          Explanation

                    of Income (in `) Demanded Elasticity

                    Spent                          (units)

Proportion  of                                                      % change in
                                                                    quantity demanded
income      spent                                                   = % change in
                                                                    income (i.e. 100% or
remains same with @ 10% 20 (10% of                 2        Ei = 1  doubled)

increase in income         ` 200)

Proportion  of                                                      % change in
                                                                    quantity demanded
income      spent                                                   > % change in
                                                                    income (i.e. 300%)
increases   with @ 20% 40 (20% of                  4        Ei > 1

increase in income         ` 200)

Proportion  of                                                      % change in
                                                                    quantity demanded
income      spent                                           Ei = 0  < % change in
                                                              Or    income (i.e. 0%)
decreases   with @ 5% 10 (5% of                    1
                                                            Ei < 1
increase in income         ` 200)

Income elasticity of goods reveals a few very important features of demand for the goods in
question.

If income elasticity is zero, it signifies that the demand for the good is quite unresponsive to
changes in income. When income elasticity is greater than zero or positive, then an increase
in income leads to an increase in the demand for the good. This happens in the case of most
of the goods and such goods are called normal goods. For all normal goods, income
elasticity is positive. However, the degree of elasticity varies according to the nature of
commodities.

When the income elasticity of demand is negative, the good is an inferior good. In this case,
the quantity demanded at any given price decreases as income increases. The reason is that

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        2.40            BUSINESS ECONOMICS

when income increases, consumers choose to consume superior substitutes.

Another significant value of income elasticity is that of unity. When income elasticity of
demand is equal to one, the proportion of income spent on goods remains the same as
consumer's income increases. This represents a useful dividing line. If the income elasticity
for a good is greater than one, it shows that the good bulks larger in consumer's
expenditure as he becomes richer. Such goods are called luxury goods. On the other hand, if
the income elasticity is less than one, it shows that the good is either relatively less
important in the consumer's eye or, it is a good which is a necessity.

The following examples will make the above concepts clear:

(a) The income of a household rises by 10%, the demand for wheat rises by 5%.

(b) The income of a household rises by 10%, the demand for T.V. rises by 20%.

(c) The incomes of a household rises by 5%, the demand for bajra falls by 2%.

(d) The income of a household rises by 7%, the demand for commodity X rises by 7%.

(e) The income of a household rises by 5%, the demand for buttons does not change at
         all.

Using formula for income elasticity,
i.e. Ei = Percentage change in demand

                Percentage chagne in income

We will find income-elasticity for various goods. The results are as follows:

S. No.  Commodity   Income-elasticity                                                  Remarks
   a       Wheat    for the household
   b         T.V.                                                Since 0 < .5 < 1, wheat is a normal good
   c         Bajra  5%   =  .5(Ei                  <1)           and fulfils a necessity.
   d           X    10%                                          Since 2 > 1, T.V. is a luxurious commodity.
   e       Buttons
                    20%  =  2(Ei                   >1)           Since ­.4 < 0, Bajra is an inferior
                    10%                                          commodity in the eyes of the household.
                                                                 Since income elasticity is 1, X has unitary
                    (-)2%  =  (­)                  .4(Ei  <  0)  income elasticity.
                     5%                                          Buttons have zero income-elasticity.

                    7%  =1(Ei    =1)
                    7%

                    0%  =  0(Ei  =                 0)
                    5%

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P4P1LY                                2.41

It is to be noted that the words `luxury', `necessity', `inferior good' do not signify the strict
dictionary meanings here. In economic theory, we distinguish them in the manner shown above.

An important feature of income elasticity is that income elasticity differs in the short run and
long run. For nearly all goods and services the income elasticity of demand is larger in the
long run than in the short run

Knowledge of income elasticity of demand is very useful for a business firm in estimating
the future demand for its products. Knowledge of income elasticity of demand helps firms
measure the sensitivity of sales for a given product to incomes in the economy and to
predict the outcome of a business cycle on its market demand. For instance, if EY = 1, sales
move exactly in step with changes in income. If EY >1, sales are highly cyclical, that is, sales
are sensitive to changes in income. For an inferior good, sales are countercyclical, that is,
sales move in the opposite direction of income and EY < 0. This knowledge enables the firm
to carry out appropriate production planning and management.

ILLUSTRATION 6
Income Elasticity of Demand
A car dealer sells new as well as used cars. Sales during the previous year were as follows:

Car type                                             Price     Quantity (Nos)
  New                                              6 .5 lakhs          400
  Used                                                                4000
                                                    60,000

During the previous year, other things remaining the same, the real incomes of the customers
rose on average by 10%. During the last year sales of new cars increased to 500, but sales of
used cars declined to 3,850.

What is the income elasticity of demand for the new as well as used cars? What inference do
you draw from these measures of income elasticity?

SOLUTION
Income Elasticity of demand for new cars
Percentage change in income = 10%, given
Percentage change in quantity of new cars demanded = ( Q/Q) X 100 = (100/400) X100 = 25%
Income elasticity of demand = 25%/ 10% = + 2.5
New car is therefore income elastic. Since income elasticity is positive, new car is a normal good.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.42  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

Income Elasticity of demand for used cars

Percentage change in income = 10%, given

% change in quantity of used cars demanded = ( Q/Q) X 100 = (-1 50/4000) x100 = - 3.75%-
Income elasticity of demand = ­ 3.75/10= ­.375

Since income elasticity is negative, used car is an inferior good.

    1.7. CROSS - PRICE ELASTICITY OF DEMAND

1.7.1 Price of Related Goods and Demand

The demand for a particular commodity may change due to changes in the prices of related
goods. These related goods may be either complementary goods or substitute goods. This
type of relationship is studied under `Cross Demand'. Cross demand refers to the quantities
of a commodity or service which will be purchased with reference to changes in price, not of
that particular commodity, but of other inter-related commodities, other things remaining
the same. It may be defined as the quantities of a commodity that consumers buy per unit
of time, at different prices of a `related article', `other things remaining the same'. The
assumption `other things remaining the same' means that the income of the consumer and
also the price of the commodity in question will remain constant.
(a) Substitute Products and Demand

In the case of substitute commodities, the cross-demand curve slopes upwards (i.e.
positively), showing that more quantities of a commodity, will be demanded whenever there
is a rise in the price of a substitute commodity. In figure 10, the quantity demanded of tea is
given on the X axis. Y axis represents the price of coffee which is a substitute for tea. When
the price of coffee increases, due to the operation of the law of demand, the demand for
coffee falls. The consumers will substitute tea in the place of coffee. The price of tea is
assumed to be constant. Therefore, whenever there is an increase in the price of one
commodity, the demand for the substitute commodity will increase.

                                               Fig. 10: Substitutes

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P4P3LY  2.43

(b) Complementary Goods

In the case of complementary goods, as shown in the figure 11 below, a change in the price
of a good will have an opposite reaction on the demand for the other commodity which is
closely related or complementary. For instance, an increase in demand for solar panels will
necessarily increase the demand for batteries. The same is the case with complementary
goods such as bread and butter; car and petrol, electricity and electrical gadgets etc.
Whenever there is a fall in the demand for solar panels due to a rise in their prices, the
demand for batteries will fall, not because the price of batteries has gone up, but because
the price of solar panels has gone up. So, we find that there is an inverse relationship
between price of a commodity and the demand for its complementary good (other things
remaining the same).

                                         Fig. 11: Complementary Goods
We shall now look into the cross - price elasticity of demand.
The cross-price elasticity of demand between two goods measures the effect of the change
in one good's price on the quantity demanded of the other good. Here, we consider the
effect of changes in relative prices within a market on the pattern of demand. A change in
the demand for one good in response to a change in the price of another good represents
cross elasticity of demand of the former good for the latter good. It is equal to the
percentage change in the quantity demanded of one good divided by the percentage
change in the other good's price.

                           Ec = Percentage change in quantity demanded of good X
                                           Percentage chagne inprice of good Y

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.44  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

      Symbolically, (mathematically)

                                                   Ec  =  qx  ÷ py
                                                          qx     py

                                                   Ec  =  qx  ÷py
                                                          py    qx

         Where Ec stands for cross elasticity.

                   qx stands for original quantity demanded of X.

                   qx stands for change in quantity demanded of X

                   py stands for the original price of good Y.

                   py stands for a small change in the price of Y.

In the case of the cross-price elasticity of demand, the sign (plus or minus) is very important:
it tells us whether the two goods are complements or substitutes.

When two goods X and Y are substitutes, the cross-price elasticity of demand is positive: a
rise in the price of Y increases the demand for X and causes a rightward shift of the demand
curve. When the cross-price elasticity of demand is positive, its size is a measure of how
closely substitutable the two goods are. Greater the cross elasticity, the closer is the
substitute. Higher the value of cross elasticity, greater will be the substitutability.

 If two goods are perfect substitutes for each other, the cross elasticity between them is
         infinite.

 If two goods are close substitutes, the cross-price elasticity will be positive and large.

 If two goods are not close substitutes, the cross-price elasticity will be positive and small.

 If two goods are totally unrelated, the cross-price elasticity between them is zero.

When two goods are complementary (tea and sugar) to each other, the cross elasticity
between them is negative so that a rise in the price of one leads to a fall in the quantity
demanded of the other causing a leftward shift of the demand curve. The size of the cross-
price elasticity of demand between two complements tells us how strongly complementary
they are: if the cross-price elasticity is only slightly below zero, they are weak complements;
if it is negative and very high, they are strong complements.

However, one need not base the classification of goods on the basis of the above
definitions. While the goods between which cross elasticity is positive can be called

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P4P5LY                    2.45

substitutes, the goods between which cross elasticity is negative are not always
complementary. This is because negative cross elasticity is also found when the income
effect of the price change is very strong.

The concept of cross elasticity of demand is useful for a manager while making decisions
regarding changing the prices of his products which have substitutes and complements. If cross
elasticity to change in the price of substitutes is greater than one, the firm may lose by
increasing the prices and gain by reducing the prices of his products. With proper knowledge of
cross elasticity, the firm can plan policies to safeguard against fluctuating prices of substitutes
and complements.

Cross- price elasticity of demand

ILLUSTRATION 7

A shopkeeper sells only two brands of note books Imperial and Royal. It is observed that when the
price of Imperial rises by 10% the demand for Royal increases by 15%.What is the cross price
elasticity for Royal against the price of Imperial?

SOLUTION        Ec = Percentage change in quantity demanded of good X
Ec = 15% =+1.5                 Percentage chagne inprice of good Y

     10%

The two brands of note book Imperial and Royal are substitutes with significant substitutability
ILLUSTRATION 8

The cross price elasticity between two goods X and Y is known to be - 0.8. If the price of good Y
rises by 20%, how will the demand for X change?

SOLUTION
Inserting the values in the formula:
-0.8 = X/ 20%
% change in quantity demanded of X = 20% x - 0.8 = - 16%
Since cross elasticity is negative, X and Y are complementary goods

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          2.46  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

ILLUSTRATION 9

The price of 1kg of tea is ` 30. At this price 5kg of tea is demanded. If the price of coffee rises
from ` 25 to ` 35 per kg, the quantity demanded of tea rises from 5kg to 8kg. Find out the
cross price elasticity of tea.

SOLUTION

          Cross elasticity = qx ×py                Here x = tea
                                   py qx
                                                           y = coffee

                Ec = 8 ­ 5 × 25 = 3 × 25 =+1.5
                        10 5 10 5

The elasticity of demand of tea is +1.5 showing that the demand of tea is highly elastic with
respect to coffee. The positive sign shows that tea and coffee are substitute goods.

ILLUSTRATION 10

The price of 1 kg of sugar is ` 50. At this price 10 kg is demanded. If the price of tea falls from
30 to ` 25 per kg, the consumption of sugar rises from 10 kg to 12 kg. Find out the cross price
elasticity and comment on its value.

SOLUTION

          Cross elasticity = qx × py               Here x =Sugar
                                   py qx
                                                            y = Tea

                = 2 × 30 =(­)1.2
                   ­5 10

Since the elasticity is -1.2, we can say that sugar and tea are complementary in nature.

    1.8 ADVERTISEMENT ELASTICITY

Advertisement elasticity of sales or promotional elasticity of demand is the responsiveness
of a good's demand to changes in the firm's spending on advertising. The advertising
elasticity of demand measures the percentage change in demand that occurs given a one
percent change in advertising expenditure. Advertising elasticity measures the effectiveness
of an advertisement campaign in bringing about new sales.

Advertising elasticity of demand is typically positive. Higher the value of advertising
elasticity greater will be the responsiveness of demand to change in advertisement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P4P7LY                              2.47

Advertisement elasticity varies between zero and infinity. It is measured by using the
formula;

                                   Ea = % Change in quantity demanded
                                           % change in spending on advertising

                                Ea = Qd / Qd
                                            A / A

Where  Qd denotes increase in demand
          A denotes additional expenditure on advertisement
         Qd denotes initial demand
         A denotes initial expenditure on advertisement

Elasticity    Interpretation
Ea = 0
Ea>0 but < 1  Demand does not respond at all to increase in advertisement
Ea = 1        expenditure
Ea> 1
              Increase in demand is less than proportionate to the increase in
              advertisement expenditure

              Demand increase in the same proportion in which advertisement
              expenditure increase

              Demand increase at a higher rate than increase in advertisement
              expenditure

As far as a business firm is concerned, the measure of advertisement elasticity is useful in
understanding the effectiveness of advertising and in determining the optimum level of
advertisement expenditure.

SUMMARY

 Buyers constitute the demand side of the market; sellers make the supply side of that
         market. The quantity that consumers buy at a given price determines the size of the
         market.

 Demand means desire or wish to buy and consume a commodity or service backed
         by adequate ability to pay and willingness to pay

 The important factors that determine demand are price of the commodity, price of
         related commodities, income of the consumer, tastes and preferences of consumers,
         consumer expectations regarding future prices, size of population, composition of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.48  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         population, the level of national income and its distribution, consumer-credit facility
         and interest rates.

 The law of demand states that people will buy more at lower prices and less at higher
         prices, other things being equal.

 A demand schedule is a table that shows various prices and the corresponding
         quantities demanded. The demand schedules are of two types; individual demand
         schedule and market demand schedule.

 According to Marshall, the demand curve slopes downwards due to the operation of
         the law of diminishing marginal utility. However, according to Hicks and Allen it is
         due to income effect and substitution effect.

 The demand curve usually slopes downwards; but exceptionally slopes upwards
         under certain circumstances as in the case of conspicuous goods, Giffen goods,
         conspicuous necessities, future expectations about prices, demand for necessaries
         and speculative goods.

 When the quantity demanded decreases due to a rise in own price, it is contraction
         of demand. On the contrary, when the price falls and the quantity demanded
         increases it is extension of demand.

 The demand curve will shift to the right when there is a rise in income (unless the
         good is an inferior one), a rise in the price of a substitute, a fall in the price of a
         complement, a rise in population and a change in tastes in favour of commodity. The
         opposite changes will shift the demand curve to the left.

 Elasticity of demand refers to the degree of sensitiveness or responsiveness of
         demand to a change in any one of its determinants. Elasticity of demand is classified
         mainly into four kinds. They are price elasticity of demand, income elasticity of
         demand, advertisement elasticity and cross elasticity of demand.

 Price elasticity of demand refers to the percentage change in quantity demanded of a
         commodity as a result of a percentage change in price of that commodity. Because
         demand curve slopes downwards and to the right, the sign of price elasticity is
         negative. We normally ignore the sign of elasticity and concentrate on the
         coefficient. Greater the absolute coefficient, greater is the price elasticity.

 In point elasticity, we measure elasticity at a given point on a demand curve. When
         the price change is somewhat larger or when price elasticity is to be found between
         two prices or two points on the demand curve, we use arc elasticity

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THEORY OF DEMAND AND S1U.P4P9LY                    2.49

 Income elasticity of demand is the percentage change in quantity demanded of a
         commodity as a result of a percentage change in income of the consumer. Goods
         and services are classified as luxuries, normal or inferior, depending on the
         responsiveness of spending on a product relative to percentage change in income.

 The cross elasticity of demand is the percentage change in the quantity demanded of
         commodity X as a result of a percentage change in the price of some related
         commodity Y. Products can be substitutes, and their cross elasticity is then positive;
         cross elasticity is negative for products that are complements.

 Advertisement elasticity of sales or promotional elasticity of demand measures the
         responsiveness of a good's demand to changes in the firm's spending on advertising.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
