CHAPTER  4

PRICE DETERMINATION
IN DIFFERENT MARKETS

  UNIT - 1: MEANING AND TYPES OF
                    MARKETS

                                           LEARNING OUTCOMES

 After studying this unit, you would be able to:
 Explain the Meaning of Market in Economics.
 Describe the key Characteristics of the Four Basic market Types Used

       in Economic Analysis.
 Provide Explicit Real Examples of the Four Types of Markets.
 Explain the Behavioural Principles Underlying these Markets.

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.2          BUSINESS ECONOMICS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS

                  Markets                          Behavioural Principal

             Determination of Prices

   Perfect   Monopoly                              Monopolistic  Oligopoly
Competition                                        Competition

    1.0 MEANING OF MARKET

We have seen in Chapter 1 that people cannot have all that they want because they need to
pay price for goods and services and the resources at their disposal are scarce. We have
come across some goods which are free or having zero prices i.e. we need not make any
payment for them. Example: air, sunlight etc. These are called free goods. Free goods being
abundant in supply do not have scarcity and need no cost to obtain them. In contrast,
economic goods are scarce in relation to their demand and have an opportunity cost. Unlike
free goods, they are exchangeable in the market and command a price. What do we
understand by the term price and why do people pay a price?

In common parlance, price signifies the quantity of money necessary to acquire a good or
service. Price connotes money-value i.e. the purchasing power of an article expressed in
terms of money. In other words, price expresses the value of a thing in relation to money i.e.
the quantity of money for which it will be exchanged. Value in exchange or exchange value,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS           4.3

according to Ricardo, means command over commodities in general, or power in exchange
over purchasable commodities in general.

We need to distinguish between two important concepts namely, `value in use' and `value in
exchange'. Value in use refers to usefulness or utility i.e the attribute which a thing may have
to satisfy human needs. Value in exchange or economic value is the amount of goods and
services which we may obtained in the market in exchange of a particular thing. It is
measured by the amount someone is willing to give up in other goods and services in order
to obtain a good or service. In a market economy, the amount of currency (e.g. Dollar,
Rupees) is a universally accepted measure of economic value, because the number of units
of money that a person is willing to pay for something tells how much of all other goods
and services they are willing to give up to get that item.

In Economics, we are only concerned with exchange value. Considerations such as
sentimental value mean little in a market economy. Sentimental value is subjective and
reflects an exaggerated judgment about the worth of a commodity. For example, If a person
says to his best friend that I like your car and if you give it to me then I will be lifetime
obliged to you. In this case, lifetime obligation is a sentimental value and has no meaning as
against monetary consideration.

Exchange value is determined in the market where exchange of goods and services takes
place. In our day to day life, we come across many references to markets such as oil market,
wheat market, vegetable market etc. These have connotations of a place where buyers and
sellers gather to exchange goods at a price. In Economics, markets are crucial focus of
analysis, and therefore we need to understand how this term is used. A market is a collection
of buyers and sellers with the potential to trade. The actual or potential interactions of the
buyers and sellers determine the price of a product or service.

A market need not be formal or held in a particular place. Second-hand cars are often
bought and sold through newspaper advertisements. Second-hand goods may be disposed
off by listing it in an online shop or by placing a card in the local shop window. In the
present high tech world, goods and services are effortlessly bought and sold online. Online
shopping has revolutionized the business world by making nearly everything people want
available by the simple click of a mouse button.

While studying about market economy, it is essential to understand how price is determined.
Since this is done in the market, we can define the market simply as all those buyers and
sellers of a good or service who influence price.

The elements of a market are:

(i) Buyers and sellers;

(ii) A product or service;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.4  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

(iii) Bargaining for a price;

(iv) Knowledge about market conditions; and

(v) One price for a product or service at a given time.

1.0.0 Classification of Market

Markets are generally classified into product markets and factor markets. Product markets
are markets for goods and services in which households buy the goods and services they
want from firms. Factor markets, on the other hand, are those in which firms buy the
resources they need ­ land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship- to produce goods and
services. While product markets allocate goods to consumers, factor markets allo-cate
productive resources to producers and help ensure that those resources are used efficiently.
The prices in factor markets are known as factor prices.

In Economics, generally the classification of markets is made on the basis of

(a) Geographical Area

(b) Time

(c) Nature of transaction

(d) Regulation

(e) Volume of business

(f) Type of Competition.
On the basis of geographical area

From the marketing perspective, the geographical area in which the product sales should be
undertaken has vast implications for the firm. On the basis of geographical area covered,
markets are classified into:-

Local Markets: When buyers and sellers are limited to a local area or region, the market is
called a local market. Generally, highly perishable goods and bulky articles, the transport of
which over a long distance is uneconomical' command a local market. In this case, the
extent of the market is limited to a particular locality. For example, locally supplied services
such as those of hair dressers and retailers have a narrow customer base.

Regional Markets: Regional markets cover a wider area such as a few adjacent cities, parts
of states, or cluster of states. The size of the market is generally large and the nature of
buyers may vary in their demand characteristics. For eg. Mekhela Chador (Traditional Assamese
Saree) is primarily worn by women in Assam and adjoining areas.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS           4.5

National Markets: When the demand for a commodity or service is limited to the national
boundaries of a country, we say that the product has a national market. The trade policy of
the government may restrict the trading of a commodity to within the country. For example
Hindi books may have national markets in India; outside India one may not have market for
Hindi books.

International markets: A commodity is said to have international market when it is
exchanged internationally. Usually, high value and small bulk commodities are demanded
and traded internationally. For example Gold and Silver are examples of commodities that
have international market.

The above classification has become more or less out-dated as we find that in modern days
even highly perishable goods have international market.

On the basis of Time

Alfred Marshall conceived the `Time' element in markets and on the basis of this, markets
are classified into:

Very short period market: Market period or very short period refers to a period of time in
which supply is fixed and cannot be increased or decreased. Commodities like vegetables,
flower, fish, eggs, fruits, milk, etc., which are perishable and the supply of which cannot be
changed in the very short period come under this category. Since supply is fixed, very short
period price is dependent on demand. An increase in demand will raise the prices vice versa.

Short-period Market: Short period is a period which is slightly longer than the very short
period. In this period, the supply of output may be increased by increasing the employment
of variable factors with the given fixed factors and state of technology. Since supply can be
moderately adjusted, the changes in the short period prices on account of changes in
demand are less compared to market period.

Long-period Market: In the long period, all factors become variable and the supply of
commodities may be changed by altering the scale of production. As such, supply may be
fully adjusted to changes in demand conditions. The interaction between long run supply
and demand determines long run equilibrium price or `normal price'.

Very long-period or secular period is one when secular movements are recorded in certain
factors over a period of time. The period is very long. The factors include the size of the
population, capital supply, supply of raw materials etc.

On the basis of Nature of Transactions

a. Spot or cash Market: Spot transactions or spot markets refer to those markets
         where goods are exchanged for money payable either immediately or within a short

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.6  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         span of time. For example, grains sold in the Mandi at the current prices and cash is
         payable immediately are thus part of Spot Market.

b. Forward or Future Market: In this market, transactions involve contracts with a
         promise to pay and deliver goods at some future date. For example, purchase of
         foreign currency contract at future rate from bank.

On the basis of Regulation

a. Regulated Market: In this market, transactions are statutorily regulated so as to put
         an end to unfair practices. Such markets may be established for specific products or
         for a group of products. For example, stock exchange.

b. Unregulated Market: It is also called a free market as there are no stipulations on
         the transactions. For example. Weekly markets (Haat Bazaar).

On the basis of volume of Business

a. Wholesale Market: The wholesale market is the market where the commodities are
         bought and sold in bulk or large quantities. Transactions generally take place
         between traders. i.e. Business to Business (B2B).

b. Retail Market: When the commodities are sold in small quantities, it is called retail
         market. This is the market for ultimate consumers i.e. Business to Consumer (B2C).

On the basis of Competition

Based on the type of competition markets are classified into a) perfectly competitive market
and b) imperfectly competitive market.
We shall study these markets in greater detail in the following paragraphs.

    1.1 TYPES OF MARKET STRUCTURES

For a consumer, a market consists of those firms from which he can buy a well-defined
product; for a producer, a market consists of those buyers to whom he can sell a single well-
defined product. If a firm knows precisely the demand curve it faces, it would know its
potential revenue. If it also knows its costs, it can readily discover the profit that would be
associated with different levels of output and therefore can choose the output level that
maximizes profit. But, suppose the firm knows its own product's costs and the market
demand curve for the product but does not know its own demand curve. In other words, it
does not know its own total sales. In order to find this, the firm needs to answer the
following questions. How many competitors are there in the market selling similar products?
If one firm changes its price, will its market share change? If it reduces its price, will other
firms follow it or not? There are many other related questions that need to be answered.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS                         4.7

Answers to questions of this type will be different in different circumstances. For example, if
there is only one firm in the market, the whole of the market demand will be satisfied by this
particular firm. But, if there are two large firms in the industry, they will share the market
demand in some proportion. A firm has to be very cautious of the reactions of the other firm
to every decision it makes. But if there are, say, more than 5,000 small firms in an industry,
each firm will be less worried about the reactions of other firms to its decisions because
each firm sells only a small proportion of the market. Thus, we find that the market
behaviour is greatly affected by the structure of the market. We can conceive of more than
thousand types of market structures, but we shall focus on a few theoretical market types
which mostly cover a high proportion of cases actually found in the real world. These are:

Perfect Competition: Perfect competition is characterised by many sellers selling identical
products to many buyers.

Monopolistic Competition: It differs in only one respect, namely, there are many sellers
offering differentiated products to many buyers. For example, shampoo manufacturers.

Monopoly: It is a situation where there is a single seller producing for many buyers. Its
product is necessarily extremely differentiated since there are no competing sellers
producing products which are close substitutes. For example: Indian Railways.

Oligopoly: There are a few sellers selling competing products to many buyers. For example:
Telecom Industry. Table 1 summarises the major distinguishing characteristics of these four
major market forms.

Table 1 - Distinguishing Features of Major Types of Markets

Assumption                                         Market Types

                               Perfect             Monopolistic Oligopoly Monopoly

                               Competition Competition

Number of sellers              Very large          Large   Small        One

                                                           numbers

Product differentiation        None                Slight   None to     Extreme
                                                           substantial

Price elasticity of demand of  Infinite            Large   Small        Small
a firm

Degree of control over price   None                Some    Some              Very
                                                                        considerable

Before discussing each market form in greater detail, it is worthwhile to know the concepts
of total, average and marginal revenue and the behavioural principles which apply to all
market conditions.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.8  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

1.2 CONCEPTS OF TOTAL REVENUE, AVERAGE
         REVENUE AND MARGINAL REVENUE

Total Revenue: If a firm sells 100 units for ` 10 each, what is the amount which it realises? It
realises ` 1,000 (100 x 10), which is nothing but the total revenue for the firm. Thus, we may
state that total revenue or the total expenditure incurred by the purchasers of the firm's
product refers to the amount of money which a firm realises by selling certain units of a
commodity. Symbolically, total revenue may be expressed as TR = P x Q.

Where,TR is total revenue

     P is price of a commodity sold.

     Q is quantity of a commodity sold.

This may be represented by the following diagrams. In figure A, when the price of the
product is ` 30, the quantity sold is 40 units. The total revenue is P x Q = ` 1200. Panel B
shows the total revenue curve of a competitive firm having a perfectly elastic demand curve.
Since the firm can sell any quantity at market determined prices, the TR curve is linear and
starts from the origin.

(A)                        (B)

                                               Figure 1: Total Revenue
Average Revenue: Average revenue is the revenue earned per unit of output. It is nothing
but price of one unit of output because price is always per unit of a commodity. For this
reason, average revenue curve is also the firms demand curve. Symbolically, average revenue
is:

             TR
        AR= Q

         Where AR is average revenue

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS                            4.9

           TR is the total revenue

                   Q is quantity of a commodity sold

          PQ
Or AR= Q

Or AR = P

If, for example, a firm realises total revenue of ` 1,000 by the sale of 100 units, it implies that
the average revenue is ` 10 (1,000/100) or the firm has sold the commodity at a price of ` 10
per unit.

Marginal Revenue: Marginal revenue (MR) is the change in total revenue resulting from the
sale of an additional unit of the commodity. Thus, if a seller realises ` 1,000 while selling 100
units and ` 1,200 while selling 101 units, we say that the marginal revenue is ` 200. We can
say that MR is the rate of change in total revenue resulting from the sale of an additional

                        TR
unit of output. MR= Q

Where MR is marginal revenue

           TR is total revenue

           Q is quantity of a commodity sold

           stands for a small change

For one unit change in output
         MRn = TRn­ TR n-1
         Where TR is the total revenue when sales are at the rate of n units per period.

       TR n-1is the total revenue when sales are at the rate of (n ­ 1) units per period.

In order to understand the above concepts clearly, look at Table -2. In column 1, the number
of units sold of commodity X is given. Column 2 shows the total revenue fetched by selling
different units. Column 3 shows average revenue which is nothing but price per unit. Column
4 shows marginal revenue which is addition to the total revenue by the sale of an additional
unit of output.

       Table 2: Total Revenue, Average Revenue and Marginal Revenue

Units      Total Revenue                           Average Revenue  Marginal Revenue
  1                10                                        10                10
  2                18                                         9                 8

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    4.10      BUSINESS ECONOMICS

3         24                                       8  6

4         28                                       7  4

5         30                                       6  2

6         30                                       5  0

7         28                                       4  -2

8         24                                       3  -4

9         18                                       2  -6

10        10                                       1  -8

Note that the total revenue is maximum when 5 units of X are sold. It stays constant for one
more unit and then begins to fall. Average revenue keeps on falling showing inverse
relationship between price and quantity demanded. It represents demand function of X to
the firm. Marginal revenue keeps on falling and after becoming zero it becomes negative.
Also note that TR at any particular level of output is the sum of marginal revenues till that
level of output which can be expressed as:-

                                                         TR= MR

The question which arises is: why is the marginal revenue due to the third unit (` 6) not
equal to price of ` 8 at which the third unit is sold. The answer is that when price is reduced
for selling an additional unit, the two units which could be sold for ` 9 before will have to be
sold at the reduced price of ` 8 per unit. The total loss on previous two units due to price
fall will be equal to ` 2. Thus, for any falling average revenue (or price) schedule, marginal
revenue is always less than the price. In the case of constant average revenue (or price)
schedule, the marginal revenue is equal to average revenue (or uniform price). If TR stands
for total revenue and q stands for output, marginal revenue (MR) can be expressed as:

                                                      MR = dTR/dQ

                          dTR/ dQ indicates the slope of the total revenue curve.

When the demand curve of the firm is a normal downward sloping one, there is a well-
defined relationship between average revenue, marginal revenue and total revenue. This can
be shown by the following figure presenting total revenue (TR), average revenue (AR) and
marginal revenue (MR) curves. The average revenue curve in panel B is sloping downwards
depicting the inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded. MR curve lies
below AR curve showing that marginal revenue declines more rapidly than average revenue.
Total revenue increases as long as marginal revenue is positive and declines (has a negative
slope) when marginal revenue is negative. Total revenue curve initially increases at a
diminishing rate due to diminishing marginal revenue and reaches maximum and then it

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS  4.11

falls. When marginal revenue becomes zero, the total revenue is maximum and the slope of
TR is zero.

                  Fig. 2: Total Revenue, Average Revenue and Marginal Revenue
                   Curves of a Firm which has downward Sloping Demand Curve

It may be noted that in all forms of imperfect competition, the average revenue curve of an
individual firm slopes downwards as in these market forms, when a firm increases the price
of its product, its quantity demanded decreases and vice versa. Under perfect competition,
however, since the firms are price takers, the average revenue (or price) curve or demand
curve is perfectly elastic. Perfectly elastic average revenue curve means that an individual
firm has constant average revenue (or price). When price remains constant, marginal
revenue will be equal to average revenue and thus AR curve and MR curve will coincide and
will be horizontal curves as shown in figure 3 below:

 Fig 3: Average Revenue and Marginal Revenue Curves of a Perfectly Competitive Firm

1.2.0 Relationship between AR, MR, TR and Price Elasticity of
       Demand

It is to be noted that marginal revenue, average revenue and price elasticity of demand are
uniquely related to one another through the formula:

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                4.12  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

               e -1
MR= AR  e

Where e = price elasticity of demand

Thus if e = 1,                       1-1
                      MR = AR  1 = 0

and if e >1,          MR will be positive

and if e <1,          MR will be negative

In a straight line downward falling demand curve, we know that the coefficient of price
elasticity at the middle point is equal to one. It follows that the marginal revenue
corresponding to the middle point of the demand curve (or AR curve) will be zero. On the
upper portion of the demand curve, where the elasticity is more than one, marginal revenue
will be positive and on the lower portion of the demand curve where elasticity is less than
one, marginal revenue will be negative. These can be shown in diagram:

            Fig.4: Relationship between AR, MR, TR and Price Elasticity of Demand
In fig. 4, DD is the AR or demand curve. At point C, elasticity is equal to one. Corresponding
to C on the AR curve, the marginal revenue is zero. Thus, MR curve is touching X-axis at N
(corresponding to C on the AR curve). At a greater quantity than ON, the elasticity of the AR
curve is less than one and the marginal revenue is negative. Negative marginal revenue
means MR curve goes below the X-axis to the fourth quadrant. Marginal revenue being
negative means that total revenue will diminish if a quantity greater than ON is sold. Total
revenue will be rising up to ON output since up to this the marginal revenue remains
positive. It follows that total revenue will be maximum where elasticity is equal to one. Thus,
TR is shown to be at its highest level at ON level of output (corresponding to the point C on
AR curve). Beyond ON Level of output, the TR curve has a negative slope.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS           4.13

1.2.1 Behavioural principles

Principle 1- A firm should not produce at all if its total variable costs are not met.

It is a matter of common sense that a firm should produce only if it will do better by
producing than by not producing. The firm always has the option of not producing at all. If a
firm's total revenues are not enough to make good even the total variable costs, it is better
for the firm to shut down. In other words, a competitive firm should shut down if the price is
below AVC. In that case, it will minimise loss because then its total cost will be equal to its
fixed costs and it will have an operating loss equal to its fixed cost. The sunk fixed cost is
irrelevant to the shutdown decision because fixed costs are already incurred. This means
that the minimum average variable cost is equal to the shut-down price, the price at which
the firm ceases production in the short run. Shutting down is temporary and does not
necessarily mean going out of business.

If price (AR) is greater than minimum AVC, but less than minimum ATC, the firm covers its
variable cost and some but not all of fixed cost. If price is equal to minimum ATC, the firm
covers both fixed and variable costs and earns normal profit or zero economic profit. If price
is greater than minimum ATC, the firm not only covers its full cost, but also earns positive
economic profit or super normal profit.

Principle 2 - The firm will be making maximum profits by expanding output to the
level where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost.

In other words, it will pay the firm to go on producing additional units of output so long as
the marginal revenue exceeds marginal cost i.e., additional units add more to revenues than
to cost. At the point of equality between marginal revenue and marginal cost, it will earn
maximum profits.

The above principle can be better understood with the help of figure 5 which shows a se t of
hypothetical marginal revenue and marginal cost curves. Marginal revenue curve slopes
downwards and marginal cost curve slopes upwards. They intersect each other at point E
(MC= MR) which corresponds to output Q.* Up to Q* level of output, marginal revenue is
greater than marginal cost and at output level *Q they are equal. The firm will be
maximizing profits at E (or at Q* level of output). For all levels of output less than Q*,
additional units of output add more to revenue than to cost (as their MR is more than MC)
and thus it will be profitable for the firm to produce them. The firm will be foregoing profit
equal to the area EFG if it stops at A. Similarly profits will fall, if a greater output than OQ is
produced as they will add more to cost than to revenues. On the units from Qth to Bth, the
firm will be incurring a loss equal to the area EHI.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.14  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

                         Fig: 5: Equilibrium of the Firm: Maximization of Profits
To conclude, the firm will maximize profits at the point at which marginal revenue is equal to
marginal cost.

SUMMARY

 Economic goods are scarce in relation to their demand and have an opportunity cost.
         Unlike free goods, they are exchangeable in the market and command price.

 Price connotes money-value i.e. the purchasing power of an article expressed in
         terms of money.

 Value in exchange or exchange value, according to Ricardo, means command over
         commodities in general, or power in exchange over purchasable commodities in
         general.

 Market is the whole set of arrangements for buying and selling of a commodity or
         service. Here buyers and sellers bargain over a commodity for a price.

 The elements of a market are: buyers and sellers, a product or service, bargaining for
         a price, knowledge about market conditions and one price for a product or service at
         a given time.

 Markets are generally classified into product markets and factor markets.
 The factors which determine the type of market are: nature of commodity, size of

         production and extent of demand.
 Markets can be classified on the basis of area, time, nature of transaction, regulation,

         volume of business and types of competition.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  PRICE DETERMINATION IN DIFFERENT MARKETS                  4.15

 On the basis of area: markets are classified into four i.e. local, regional, national and
         international.

 On the basis of time: markets are classified into four i.e. very short period or market
         period, short period, long period and very long period or secular period.

 On the basis of nature of transaction: markets are classified into spot market and
         future market.

 On the basis of regulation: markets are classified into regulated and unregulated
         markets.

 On the basis of volume of business: markets are classified into wholesale and retail
         markets.

 On the basis of competition: On the basis of competition we have perfectly
         competitive market and imperfect market. The imperfect market is further divided
         into monopoly, monopolistically competitive market and oligopoly market.

 Total revenue refers to the amount of money which a firm realizes by selling certain
         units of a commodity.

 Average revenue is the revenue earned per unit of output.

 Marginal revenue is the change in total revenue resulting from the sale of an
         additional unit of the commodity.

 Marginal revenue, average revenue and price elasticity of demand are uniquely
         related to one another

  e -1
  MR = AR  e Where e = price elasticity of demand.

 Total revenue will be maximum where elasticity is equal to one.

 If a firm's total revenues are not enough to make good even the total variable costs,
         it is better for the firm to shut down. In other words, a competitive firm should shut
         down if the price is below AVC.

 At the point of equality between marginal revenue and marginal cost, a firm will earn
         maximum profits.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
