CHAPTER  a  6

DETERMINATION OF
NATIONAL INCOME

     UNIT - 1: NATIONAL INCOME
                ACCOUNTING

                                         LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:
 Define national income
 Explain the usefulness and significance of national income estimates
 Differentiate among the various concepts of national income
 Describe the different methods of calculation of national income
 Outline measurement of national income in India
 Describe the system of regional accounts in India

 Identify the challenges involved in national income computation.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  a  6.2                 BUSINESS ECONOMICS

  CHAPTER OVERVIEW

                         Determination of National
                                      Income

                                                     National Income
                                                        Accounting

  Different concepts of       Measurement of                               Limitations and
     National Income     National Income in India                     Challenges of National
                                                                       Income Computation

    1.1 NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTING

National Income Accounting, pioneered by the Nobel prize-winning economists Simon
Kuznets and Richard Stone, is the system of macro-economic accounts from the stage of
production of goods and services to the stage of their final disposal. Like any other accounting
system , the national income accounts first define concepts and then construct measures
corresponding to these concepts . National Accounts help us to understand how the various
transactions from the stage of production of goods and services to the stage of their final
disposal are interrelated and give us an idea of the working of an economy. It helps to meet
the needs of Government, private analysts, policy makers and decision takers.

The Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation (MoSP&I) is responsible for the compilation of National accounts statistics.
At the State level, State Directorates of Economics and Statistics (DESs) have the responsibility
of compiling their State Domestic Product and other aggregates.

  1.2 USEFULNESS AND SIGNIFICANCE OF NATIONAL
           INCOME ESTIMATES

National income accounts are fundamental aggregate statistics in macroeconomic analysis
and are extremely useful, especially for the emerging and transition economies.

  businesses to forecast the future demand for their products.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                        6.3               a

  The estimates of national income show the composition and structure of national

  income in terms of different sectors of the economy, the periodical variations in them

  and the broad sectoral shifts in an economy over time.

  Sectoral contribution to National Income information is used by the government to

  decide various sector-specific development policies to increase growth rates.

  National income statistics also provide a quantitative basis for macroeconomic

  modelling and analysis, for assessing and choosing economic policies and for objective

  statements as well as evaluation of governments' economic policies.

  National income estimates throw light on income distribution and the possible

  inequality in the distribution among different income categories . It facilitates the

  process of comparisons of structural statistics, such as ratios of investment to growth

  , taxes proceeds and fiscal deficit , or government expenditures to GDP.

  International comparisons in respect of incomes and living standards assist in

  determining eligibility for loans, and/or other funds or conditions under which such

  loans, and/ or funds are made available.

  Combined with financial and monetary data, national income data provides a guide to

  make policies for growth and inflation.

    1.3 DIFFERENT CONCEPTS OF NATIONAL INCOME

         We begin our discussion with the basic measure of output -Gross Domestic Product,
         or GDP. The production side of the economy transforms inputs, such as labour and
         capital, into output, GDP. Inputs such as labour and capital are called factors of
         production, and the payments made to factors, such as wages and interest payments,
         are called factor payments.

1.3.1 Gross Domestic Product

Nominal GDP or GDPMP

Gross domestic product (GDP) is the value of all final goods and services produced in the
country within a given period. It includes the value of goods produced, such as houses and
mobiles, and the value of services, such as telecom, health, insurance. The output of each of
these is valued at its market price, and the values are added together to get GDPMP

Nominal GDP or GDP at Current Prices in Q1 2022-23 is estimated at  64.95 lakh crore, as
against  51.27 lakh crore in Q1 2021-22, showing a growth of 26.7 percent as compared to
32.4 percent in Q1 2021-22

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.4  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

Real GDP
Nominal GDP increases over time for two reasons:
1. The production of most of goods increases over time
2. The prices of most goods also increase over time.
If our goal is to measure production and its change over time, we need to eliminate the effect
of increasing prices on our measure of GDP. That's why real GDP is constructed as the sum of
the quantities of final goods times constant (rather than current prices)
Real GDP or Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at Constant (2011-12) Prices in Q1 2022-23
is estimated to attain a level of  36.85 lakh crore, as against  32.46 lakh crore in Q1
2021-22, showing a growth of 13.5 percent as compared to 20.1 percent in Q1 2021-22

                             REAL GDP GROWTH RATE AND INFLATION RATE

      Source IMF Data Mapper Oct 2022 https://www.imf.org/en/Countries/IND
GDP Deflator
The calculation of real GDP gives us a useful measure of inflation known as GDP deflator. The
GDP deflator is the ratio of nominal GDP in a given year to real GDP of that year.

                                            GDP Deflator = Nominal GDP x 100
                                                                    Real GDP

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                         6.5  a

The GDP deflator, as the name implies, can be used to `deflate' or take inflation out of GDP.
In other words, the GDP deflator is a price index used to convert nominal GDP to real GDP

                                               Real GDP = Nominal GDP x 100
                                                               GDP Deflator

The deflator measures the current level of prices relative to the level of prices in the base year.
Since nominal GDP and real GDP must be the same in the base year, the deflator for the base
year is always 100.

As you know, inflation is a closely monitored aspect of macroeconomic performance and a
significant variable guiding macroeconomic policy. Using the GDP deflator, the inflation rate
between two consecutive years can be compute using the following procedure:

Inflation rate in year 2 = GDP deflator in year 2 -GDP deflator in year 1 x 100
                                                   GDP deflator in year 1

GDP Deflator in India is expected to reach 154.87 points by the end of 2022, according to
Trading Economics global macro models and analysts expectations. In the long-term, the India
GDP Deflator is projected to trend around 167.94 points in 2023 and 175.67 points in 2024,
according to econometric models.

Inflation Rate in 2023 = (167.94 - 154.87) / 154.87 * 100

Inflation Rate in 2023 as compared to 2022 will be 8.439 percent.
Numerical Illustrations
ILLUSTRATION 1
Find out GDP Deflator? Interpret It

Years     Nominal GDP                              Real GDP          (In Billion Rs.)
2014             500                                   500         GDP Deflator
2015             800                                   650
2016            1150                                   800                100
2017            1300                                   950              123.08
2018            1550                                  1190              143.75
2019            1700                                  1240              136.84
                                                                        130.25
                                                                        137.10

SOLUTION

A deflator above 100 is an indication of price levels being higher as compared to the base
year. From years 2015 through 2019, we find that price levels are higher than that of the base
year, the highest being in the year 2016.If the GDP deflator is greater than 100, then nominal

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a               6.6             BUSINESS ECONOMICS

GDP is greater than real GDP. If the GDP deflator next year is less than the GDP deflator this
year, then the price level has fallen; if it is greater, price levels have increased.

ILLUSTRATION 2

The nominal and real GDP respectively of a country in a particular year are ` 3000 Crores and
` 4700 Crores respectively. Calculate GDP deflator and comment on the level of prices of the
year in comparison with the base year.

SOLUTION

Nominal GDP =           ` 3000 Crores

Real GDP = ` 4700 Crores

GDP Deflator =  Nominal GDP     x 100
                  Real GDP

               3000  x  100  =  63.83
               4700

The price level has fallen since GDP deflator is less than 100 at 63.83.

ILLUSTRATION 3

Find nominal GDP if real GDP = 450 and price index = 120

SOLUTION

Nominal GDP =   Real GDP x      Price Index
                                    100

Nominal GDP = 450 x 120 = 540
                             100

ILLUSTRATION 4

Suppose nominal GNP of a country in 2010 is given at ` 600 Crores and price index is given as
base year 2010 is 100. Now let the nominal GDP increases to ` 1200 Crores in 2018 and the
price index rises to 110, find out real GDP?

SOLUTION

Real GDP = Nominal GDP x 100
                                      Price Index

=1200 100 = 1090.9 Crores
           110

Net Domestic Product

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                   6.7  a

As you know capital wears out, or depreciates, while it is being used to produce output, Net
Domestic Product (NDP) is equal to GDP minus depreciation. NDP thus comes closer to
measuring the net amount of goods and services produced in the country in a given period
of time. It is the total value of production minus the value of capital used up in producing that
output. Other considerations such as asset obsolescence and complete destruction are also
taken into account by the NDP.

                                 NDP MP = GDP MP ­ Depreciation

As you are aware, the basis of distinction between `gross' and `net' is depreciation or
consumption of fixed capital.

              Gross = Net + Depreciation or Net = Gross ­ Depreciation

1.3.2 Gross National Product (GNP)

Gross National Product (GNP) is a measure of the market value of all final economic goods and
services, produced within the domestic territory of a country by normal residents during an
accounting year including net factor incomes from abroad. It is the total income earned by a
nation's permanent residents (called nationals). It differs from GDP by including income that our
citizens earn abroad and excluding income that foreigners earn here. Profits earned by Apple from
its Indian manufacturing operations is part of India's GDP but these profits are part of USA's GNP.
Gross National Product (GNP) is evaluated at market prices and therefore it is in fact Gross
National Product at market prices (GNP MP).
GNP MP = GDP MP +Factor income earned by the domestic factors of production employed in the
rest of the world - Factor income earned by the factors of production of the rest of the world
employed in the domestic territory.

                         GNP MP = GDP MP + Net Factor Income from Abroad

                    GDP MP = GNP MP ­ Net Factor Income from Abroad (NFIA)

NFIA is the difference between the aggregate amount that a country's citizens and companies
earn abroad, and the aggregate amount that foreign citizens and overseas companies earn in that
country.

          NFIA =Net compensation of employees + Net income from property and
                                entrepreneurship + Net retained earnings

If Net Factor Income from Abroad is positive, then GNPMP would be greater than GDPMP.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.8  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

You might have noticed that the distinction between `national' and `domestic' is net factor
income from abroad.

                      National = Domestic + Net Factor Income from Abroad

1.3.5 Net National Product at Market Prices (NNPMP)

Net National Product at Market Prices (NNPMP) is a measure of the market value of all final
economic goods and services, produced by normal residents within the domestic territory of
a country including Net Factor Income from Abroad during an accounting year excluding
depreciation.
NNP MP = GNP MP ­ Depreciation
NNP MP = NDP MP + Net Factor Income from Abroad
NNP MP = GDP MP + Net Factor Income from Abroad ­ Depreciation

1.3.6 Gross Domestic Product at Factor Cost (GDPFC)

Gross domestic product (GDP) at factor cost is GDP at market prices minus net indirect
taxes. The money value of output produced within a country's domestic limits in a year, as
received by the factors of production, is measured by GDP at factor cost.
Thus, we find that the basis of distinction between market price and factor cost is net indirect
taxes (i.e., Indirect taxes - Subsidies).

                            Market Price = Factor Cost + Net Indirect Taxes
                                                  = Factor Cost + Indirect Taxes ­ Subsidies

                            Factor Cost = Market Price - Net Indirect Taxes
                                                = Market Price - Indirect Taxes + Subsidies

Gross Domestic Product at Factor Cost (GDPFC)
                                       = GDP MP ­ Indirect Taxes + Subsidies
                                       = Compensation of employees
                                       + Operating Surplus (rent + interest+ profit)
                                       + Mixed Income of Self- employed
                                       + Depreciation

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                                           6.9           a

                                                   GDP at Factor Cost

Industry                                                      ` in crore)                 Percentage
                                                   Gross Domestic Product                change over
1. agriculture, forestry and fishing                                                     previous year
2. mining and quarrying                            Previous Year       Present Year
3. manufacturing                                                  Q2                 Q2                  Q2
4. electricity, gas and water supply                                                                     3.2
5. construction                                             131,550           135,789                   -2.9
6. trade, hotels, transport and                              25,509             24,774                   2.7
                                                                                                         9.8
     communication                                          187,763           192,849                    4.3
7. financing, ins., real est. and                            22,894             25,137                   9.9
                                                             91,556             95,489
     business services                                                                                  10.5
8. community, social and personal                           311,166           342,080
                                                                                                         6.6
     services                                      208,644             230,627
GDP at factor cost                                                                                       6.9
                                                   169,390             180,511

                                                   1,148,472           1,227,254

Factor Cost vs Basic Price vs Market Price

At this stage, we need to clearly understand the difference between the concepts: `market
price' and `factor cost and Basic Price

GDP at Basic Price excludes any taxes on products the producer receives from the purchaser
and passes on to the government (Eg: GST or Sales Tax or Services Tax) but includes any
subsidies the producer receives from the government and uses to lower the prices charged to
purchasers. In simple terms, the basic price is the subsidised price without tax.

Basic price = factor cost + Production taxes ­ Production subsidy

Relationship between Factor Cost and Basic Price:

Factor cost + production tax ­ production subsidies = Basic prices.

Relationship between Basic Price and Market Price:

Basic Price + Product tax ­ Product Subsidy = Market Price.

Note: Thus, market price includes both product tax as well as production tax while
excluding both product and production subsidies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.10  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

1.3.7 Net Domestic Product at Factor Cost (NDPFC)

Net Domestic Product at Factor Cost (NDPFC)is defined as the total factor incomes earned by
the factors of production. In other words, it is sum of domestic factor incomes or domestic
income net of depreciation.

As mentioned above, market price includes indirect taxes imposed by government. We have
to deduct indirect taxes and add the subsidies in order to calculate that part of domestic
product which actually accrues to the factors of production. The measure that we obtain so is
called Net Domestic Product at factor cost.

NDPFC = NDP MP ­ Net Indirect Taxes
                          = Compensation of employees
                          + Operating Surplus (rent + interest+ profit)
                          + Mixed Income of Self- employed

1.3.8 Net National Product at Factor Cost (NNPFC)or National
        Income

National Income is defined as the factor income accruing to the normal residents of the
country during a year. It is the sum of domestic factor income and net factor income from
abroad. In other words, national income is the value of factor income generated within the
country plus factor income from abroad in an accounting year.
NNPFC = National Income = FID (factor income earned in domestic territory) + NFIA.
If NFIA is positive, then national income will be greater than domestic factor incomes.

1.3.9 Per Capita Income

The GDP per capita is a measure of a country's economic output per person. It is obtained by
dividing the country's gross domestic product, adjusted by inflation, by the total population.
It serves as an indicator of the standard of living of a country.

1.3.10 Personal Income

While national income is income earned by factors of production, Personal Income is the
income received by the household sector including Non-Profit Institutions Serving
Households. Thus, national income is a measure of income earned and personal income is a
measure of actual current income receipts of persons from all sources which may or may not
be earned from productive activities during a given period of time. Examples of this include
transfer payments such as social security benefits, unemployment compensation, welfare

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                   6.11  a

payments etc. Individuals also contribute income which they do not actually receive; for
example, undistributed corporate profits and the contribution of employers to social security.
Personal income excludes retained earnings, indirect business taxes, corporate income taxes
and contributions towards social security. Households receive interest payments from the
firms and governments; they also make interest payments to firms and governments. As such,
the net interest paid by households to firms and government is also deducted from national
income. Personal income forms the basis for consumption expenditures and is derived from
national income as follows:

 PI = NI + income received but not earned ­ income earned but not received.
 PI = NI - Undistributed profits ­ Net interest payments made by households ­

           Corporate Tax +Transfer Payments to the households from firms and
           government.

An important point to remember is that national income is not the sum of personal incomes
because personal income includes transfer payments (eg. pension) which are excluded from
national income. Further, not all national income accrues to individuals as their personal
income.

1.3.11 Disposable Personal Income (DI)

Disposable personal income is a measure of the amount of the money in the hands of the
individuals that is available for their consumption or savings. Disposable personal income is
derived from personal income by subtracting the direct taxes paid by individuals and other
compulsory payments made to the government.

                  DI = PI - Personal Income Taxes ­ Non tax payments

Apart from the above aggregates, a few other aggregates are reported in India. These reflect
the amount of goods and services the domestic economy has at its disposal. Two more
concepts need to be understood, namely:

1. Net National Disposable Income

         Net National Disposable Income (NNDI) = Net National Income + other net current
         transfers from the rest of the world (Receipts less payments)

         Net National Disposable Income (NNDI) = NNI + net taxes on income and wealth
         receivable from abroad + net social contributions and benefits receivable from abroad.

2. Gross National Disposable Income (GNDI) = NNDI + CFC = GNI + other net current
         transfers from the rest of the world (Receipts less payments)

         (Other Current Transfers refer to current transfers other than the primary incomes)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        a         6.12         BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         (For a detailed explanation of concepts please refer `Glossary of Main Terms' Apr 1, 2020 -
         National Accounts Statistics-Sources & Methods, 2007, MOSPI)

Domestic Income may be categorized into:

1. Income from domestic product accruing to the public sector which includes income from
         property and entrepreneurship accruing to government administrative departments and
         savings of non-departmental enterprises.

2. Income from domestic product accruing to private sector = NDPFC - Income from property
         and entrepreneurship accruing to government administrative departments - Savings of
         non-departmental enterprises.

1.3.12 Private Income

Private income is a measure of the income (both factor income and transfer income) which
accrues to private sector from all sources within and outside the country.

Private Income = Factor income from net domestic product accruing to the private sector +
Net factor income from abroad + National debt interest + Current transfers from government
+ Other net transfers from the rest of the world.

Numerical Illustrations

ILLUSTRATION 5

From the following data, calculate NNPFC, NNPMP, GNPMP and GDPMP.

Items                                              ` in Crores

Operating surplus                                  2000

Mixed income of self-employed                      1100

Rent                                               550

Profit                                             800

Net indirect tax                                   450

Consumption of fixed capital                       400

Net factor income from abroad                      -50

Compensation of employees                          1000

SOLUTION

GDPMP = Compensation of employees + mixed income of self-employed +
            operating surplus + depreciation + net indirect taxes

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                        6.13  a

(Note: operating surplus = rent+ profit + interest)

       =1000 + 1100 + 2000 + 400 + 450 =4950

GNPMP = GDPMP + NFIA = 4950 + (-50) = 4900

NNPMP = GNPMP P consumption of fixed capital = 4900 ­ 400 = 4500

NNPFC or NI = NNPMP ­ NIT =4500 ­ 450 = = 4050 Crores

ILLUSTRATION 6

From the following data, estimate National Income and Personal Income.

Items                                                    ` . in Crores

Net national product at market price                     1,891

Income from property and entrepreneurship accruing

to government administrative departments                 45

Indirect taxes                                           175

Subsidies                                                30

Saving of non-departmental enterprises                   10

Interest on National debt                                15

Current transfers from government                        35

Current transfers from rest of the world                 20

Saving of private corporate sector                       25

Corporate profit tax                                     25

SOLUTION

National Income = Net national product at market price ­ Indirect taxes + Subsidies

                = 1,891 ­ 175 + 30 = 1746crores

Personal Income =     National income ­ Income from property and entrepreneurship accruing to
                      government administrative departments ­ Saving of non-departmental
                      enterprises + National debt interest + Current transfers from government
                      + Current transfers from rest of the world ­ Saving of private corporate
                      sector ­ Corporate profit tax

                = 1746 ­ 45 ­10+ 15 + 35 + 20 ­ 25 ­ 25

                = 1711 Crores

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       a        6.14           BUSINESS ECONOMICS

ILLUSTRATION 7

Calculate the aggregate value of depreciation when the GDP at market price of a country in a
particular year was ` 1,100 Crores. Net Factor Income from Abroad was ` 100 Crores. The value
of Indirect taxes ­ Subsidies was ` 150 Crores and National Income was ` 850 Crores.

SOLUTION

Given

GDPMP = 1100 Crores, NFIA = 100 Crores, NIT =150 Crores, NNPFC = 850 Crores

 GDPFC = GDPMP- NIT = 1100 ­ 150 = 950

GNPFC = GDPFC+ NFIA = 950 + 100 = 1050

NNPFC = GNPFC- Depreciation

850 = 1050- Depreciation

Depreciation = 1050 ­ 850 = 200 Crores.

ILLUSTRATION 8

On basis of following information, calculate NNP at market price and Disposable personal income

Items                                                ` in Crores

NDP at factor cost                                   14900

Income from domestic product accruing to government  150

Interest on National debt                            170

Transfer payment by government                       60

Net private donation from abroad                     30

Net factor income from abroad                        80

Indirect taxes                                       335

Direct taxes                                         100

Subsidies                                            262

Taxes on corporate profits                           222

Undistributed profits of corporations                105

SOLUTION

NNP at Market price         = NNP at factor cost +indirect tax-subsidies

Where NNP at factor cost = NDPFC + NFIA

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                           6.15     a

                   = 14900 + 80=14980

Therefore, NNP MP  = Therefore, NNP MP = 14980 + 335 ­ 262 = 15053

Disposable personal income (DI) = PI- Personal income tax

PI = NI + income received but not earned ­ income earned but not received
    = 14980+ 170+60 +30 -150 -222- 105 = 14763

Therefore, DI= 14763- 100 = 14663 Crores

    1.4 MEASUREMENT OF NATIONAL INCOME IN INDIA

1.4.1 The Circular Flow of Income

Circular flow of income refers to the continuous circulation of production, income generation
and expenditure involving different sectors of the economy. There are three different
interlinked phases in a circular flow of income, namely: production, distribution and
disposition as can be seen from the following figure.

                                                       Figure 1.1.1
                                               Circular Flow of Income

                                                    Production of goods and
                                                                services

                    Disposition            Distribution as factor
                                          incomes (Rent, Wages,
                   Consumption /
                    Investment                 Interest, Profit)

(i) In the production phase, firms produce goods and services with the help of factor
         services.

(ii) In the income or distribution phase, the flow of factor incomes in the form of rent,
         wages, interest and profits from firms to the households occurs

(iii) In the expenditure or disposition phase, the income received by different factors of
         production is spent on consumption goods and services and investment goods. This
         expenditure leads to further production of goods and services and sustains the circular
         flow.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a        6.16          BUSINESS ECONOMICS

These processes of production, distribution and disposition keep going on simultaneously and
enable us to look at national income from three different angles namely: as a flow of
production or value added, as a flow of income and as a flow of expenditure. Each of these
different ways of looking at national income suggests a different method of calculation and
requires a different set of data. The details in respect of what is measured and what data are
required for all three methods mentioned above are given in the following table.

                                                        Table 1.1.1

  Data requirements and Outcomes of Different Methods of National Income Calculation

        Method                                     Data required  What is measured

Phase of Output: Value The sum of net values added by all Contribution of production

added method (Product the producing enterprises of the units

Method)                country

Phase of income: Income Total factor incomes generated in Relative contribution of

Method                 the production of goods and factor owners

                       services

Phase of disposition:  Sum of expenditures of the three           Flow of consumption and
Expenditure method     spending units in the economy,             investment expenditures
                       namely, government, consumer
                       households, and producing
                       enterprises

Corresponding to the three phases, there are three methods of measuring national income.
They are: Value Added Method (alternatively known as Product Method); Income Method; and
Expenditure Method.

1.4.2 Value Added Method or Product Method

National income by value added method is the sum total of net value added at factor cost
across all producing units of the economy. The value added method measures the
contribution of each producing enterprise in the domestic territory of the country in an
accounting year and entails consolidation of production of each industry less intermediate
purchases from all other industries. This method of measurement shows the unduplicated
contribution by each industry to the total output. This method involves the following steps:

Step1. Identifying the producing enterprises and classifying them into different sectors
according to the nature of their activities

All the producing enterprises are broadly classified into three main sectors namely:

(i) Primary sector,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                   6.17  a

(ii) Secondary sector, and
(iii) Tertiary sector or service sector
These sectors are further divided into sub-sectors and each sub-sector is further divided into
commodity group or service-group.
Step 2. Estimating the gross value added (GVAMP) by each producing enterprise (This is the
same as GDPMP)

Gross value added (GVA MP) = Value of output ­ Intermediate consumption
                                       = (Sales + change in stock) ­ Intermediate consumption

(Note that imports are included in the value of intermediate consumption if total purchases
are given. If domestic purchases are specifically mentioned, then imports will also be added.
Also, sales include exports, if domestic sales are separately mentioned, exports need to be
added)
Step 3. Estimation of National income
For each individual unit, Net value added is found out.

                   (GVA MP) ­ Depreciation = Net value added (NVA MP)

By adding net value-added or net products of all the sub-sectors of a sector, we get the value-
added or net product of that sector. For the economy as a whole, we add the net products
contributed by each sector to get Net Domestic Product. We subtract net indirect taxes and
add net factor income from abroad to get national income.

Net value added (NVA MP) ­ Net Indirect taxes = Net Domestic Product (NVA FC)

        Net Domestic Product (NVA FC) + (NFIA) = National Income (NNP FC)

The values of the following items are also included:
(i) Own account production of fixed assets by government, enterprises and households.
(ii) Imputed value of production of goods for self- consumption, and
(iii) Imputed rent of owner occupied houses.
(iv) Change in stock(inventory)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.18  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

1.4.3 Income Method

Production is carried out by the combined effort of all factors of production. The factors are
paid factor incomes for the services rendered. In other words, whatever is produced by a
producing unit is distributed among the factors of production for their services.

Under Factor Income Method, also called Factor Payment Method or Distributed Share
Method, national income is calculated by summation of factor incomes paid out by all
production units within the domestic territory of a country as wages and salaries, rent, interest,
and profit. By definition, it includes factor payments to both residents and non- residents.

Thus,

         NDPFC = Sum of factor incomes paid out by all production units within the
                        domestic territory of a country

NNP FC or National Income= Compensation of employees
                                       + Operating Surplus (rent + interest+ profit)
                                       + Mixed Income of Self- employed
                                       + Net Factor Income from Abroad

Only incomes earned by owners of primary factors of production are included in national
income. Thus, while wages of labourers will be included, pensions of retired workers will be
excluded from national income. Compensation of employees includes, apart from wages and
salaries, bonus, dearness allowance, commission, employers' contribution to provident fund
and imputed value of compensation in kind. Non-labour income includes rent (actual and
imputed), royalty, interest on loans availed for productive services, dividends, undistributed
profits of corporations before taxes, and profits of unincorporated enterprises and of
government enterprises.

(Note: Interest paid by the government on public debt, interest on consumption loans and
interest paid by one firm to another are excluded.

                           Profit =Corporate taxes+ dividend retained+ earnings)

While using income method, capital gains, windfall profits, transfer incomes and income from
sale of second-hand goods and financial assets and payments out of past savings are not
included. However, commissions, brokerages and imputed value of services provided by
owners of production units will be included as these add to the current flow of goods and
services.

Usually it is difficult to separate labour income from capital income because in many instances
people provide both labour and capital services. Such is the case with self-employed people

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                   6.19  a

like lawyers, engineers, traders, proprietors etc. In economies where subsistence production
and small commodity production is dominant, most of the incomes of people would be of
mixed type. In sectors such as agriculture, trade, transport etc. in underdeveloped countries
(including India), it is difficult to differentiate between the labour element and the capital
element of incomes of the people. In order to overcome this difficulty a new category of
incomes, called `mixed income' is introduced which includes all those incomes which are
difficult to separate.

1.4.4 Expenditure Method

In the expenditure approach, also called Income Disposal Approach, national income is the
aggregate final expenditure in an economy during an accounting year.

                                       GDPMP =  Final Expenditure

In this approach to measuring GDP which considers the demand side of the products, we add
up the value of the goods and services purchased by each type of final user mentioned below.

1. Final Consumption Expenditure

         (a) Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE)

                   To measure this, the volume of final sales of goods and services to consumer
                   households and non-profit institutions serving households acquired for
                   consumption (not for use in production) are multiplied by market prices and
                   then summation is done. It also includes the value of primary products which
                   are produced for own consumption by the households, payments for domestic
                   services which one household renders to another, the net expenditure on
                   foreign financial assets or net foreign investment. Land and residential
                   buildings purchased or constructed by households are not part of PFCE. They
                   are included in gross capital formation. Thus, only expenditure on final goods
                   and services produced in the period for which national income is to be
                   measured and net foreign investment are included in the expenditure method
                   of calculating national income.

         (b) Government Final Consumption Expenditure

                   Since the collective services provided by the governments such as defence,
                   education, healthcare etc. are not sold in the market, the only way they can be
                   valued in money terms is by adding up the money spent by the government in
                   the production of these services. This total expenditure is treated as
                   consumption expenditure of the government. Government expenditure on
                   pensions, scholarships, unemployment allowance etc. should be excluded
                   because these are transfer payments.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.20  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

2. Gross Domestic Capital formation

         Gross domestic fixed capital formation (Gross Investment) is that part of country's total
         expenditure which is not consumed but added to the nation's fixed tangible assets and
         stocks. It consists of the acquisition of fixed assets and the accumulation of stocks. The
         stock accumulation is in the form of changes in stock of raw materials, fuels, finished
         goods and semi-finished goods awaiting completion. Thus, gross investment includes
         final expenditure on machinery and equipment and own account production of
         machinery and equipment, expenditure on construction, expenditure on changes in
         inventories, and expenditure on the acquisition of valuables such as, jewellery and
         works of art.

3. Net Exports

         Net exports are the difference between exports and imports of a country during the
         accounting year. It can be positive or negative.

How do we arrive at national income or NNPFC using the expenditure method?

GDPMP = C+ GDFC + NX

GNPMP =GDPMP + NFIA

GNPFC =GNPMP -NIT

NNPFC = GNPFC ­ Depreciation

Ideally, all the three methods of national income computation should arrive at the same figure.
When the national income of a country is measured separately using these methods, we get a
three dimensional view of the economy. Each method of measuring GDP is subject to
measurement errors and each method provides a check on the accuracy of the other methods.
By calculating total output in several different ways and then trying to resolve the differences, we
will be able to arrive at a more accurate measure than would be possible with one method alone.
Moreover, different ways of measuring total output give us different insights into the structure of
our economy.

Income method may be most suitable for developed economies where people properly file their
income tax returns. With the growing facility in the use of the commodity flow method of
estimating expenditures, an increasing proportion of the national income is being estimated by
expenditure method. As a matter of fact, countries like India are unable to estimate their national
income wholly by one method. Thus, in the agricultural sector, net value added is estimated by
the production method, in the small scale sector net value added is estimated by the income
method and in the construction sector net value added is estimated by the expenditure method.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                 DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                  6.21  a

Numerical Illustrations

ILLUSTRATION 9

Calculate National Income by Value Added Method with the help of following data-

Particulars                                        ` (in Crores)

Sales                                                    700

Opening stock                                            500

Intermediate Consumption                                 350

Closing Stock                                            400

Net Factor Income from Abroad                            30

Depreciation                                             150

Excise Tax                                               110

Subsidies                                                50

SOLUTION

NVA(FC)          = GDP (MP) ­Depreciation +NFIA- Net Indirect Tax

Where GVA(MP)    = Value of output- intermediate consumption

Value of Output  = Sales+ change in stock

                 = 700+ (400-500)=600

GVA(MP)          = 600 ­ 350= 250

Therefore NI     = 250-150 +30-(110-50)

                 = 70 Crores

ILLUSTRATION 10

Calculate the Operating Surplus with the help of following data-

Particulars                                        ` in Crores

Sales                                              4000

Compensation of employees                          800

Intermediate consumption                           600

Rent                                               400

Interest                                           300

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        a         6.22        BUSINESS ECONOMICS

Net indirect tax                                   500

Consumption of Fixed Capital                       200

Mixed Income                                       400

SOLUTION

GVAMP         = Gross Value OutputMP ­ Intermediate consumption
              = (Sales + change in stock) ­ Intermediate consumption

              = 4000-600 = 3400

GDPMP         = GVAMP = 3400 Crores
NDPMP         = GDPMP ­ consumption of fixed capital
              = 3400 ­ 200

              = 3200 Crores

NDP FC        = NDPMP ­ NIT
              = 3200 ­ 500 = 2700 Crores

NDPFC         = Compensation of employees + Operating surplus + Mixed income
2700          = 800 + Operating Surplus + 400

Operating surplus = 1500 Crores
ILLUSTRATION 11

Calculate national income by value added method.

Particulars                                                           (` in crores)
Value of output in primary sector                                               2000
Intermediate consumption of primary sector                                       200
Value of output of secondary sector                                             2800
Intermediate consumption of secondary sector                                     800
Value of output of tertiary sector                                              1600
Intermediate consumption of tertiary sector                                      600
Net factor income from abroad                                                     -30
Net indirect taxes                                                               300
Depreciation                                                                     470

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                     6.23          a

SOLUTION

GDPMP          = (Value of output in primary sector - intermediate consumption of primary
                        sector) + (value of output in secondary sector - intermediate consumption
                        of secondary sector) + (value of output in tertiary sector - intermediate
                        consumption of tertiary sector)

       Value of output in primary sector                           = 2000

       - Intermediate consumption of primary sector                = 200

       + Value of output in secondary sector                       = 2800

       - Intermediate consumption in secondary sector              = 800

       + Value of output in tertiary sector                        = 1600

       - Intermediate consumption of tertiary sector               = 600

       GDP MP =                                                    ` 4800 Crores

NNPFC = GDPMP + NFIA -NIT-Depreciation

NNPFC =National income= 4800+(-30)-300-470                         = 4000 Crores
ILLUSTRATION 12

Calculate Net Value Added by Factor Cost from the following data

Items                                                 ` in Crores

Purchase of materials                                  85

Sales                                                  450

Depreciation                                           30

Opening stock                                          40

Closing stock                                          30

Excise tax                                             45

Intermediate consumption                               200

Subsidies                                              15

SOLUTION

GVA MP         = Sales+ change in stock - Intermediate consumption

               = 450+ (30-40) -200

               = 240Crores

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          a  6.24               BUSINESS ECONOMICS

NVAMP        = GVAMP ­ Depreciation

NVAMP        = 240-30 = 210 Crores

NVAFC        = NVAMP ­ (indirect tax - subsidies)

             = 210 ­ (45 -15) = 180Crores

ILLUSTRATION 13

Calculate NI with the help of Expenditure method and income method with the help of following
data:

Items                                              ` in Crores

Compensation of employees                          1,200

Net factor income from Abroad                      20

Net indirect taxes                                 120

Profit                                             800

Private final consumption expenditure              2,000

Net domestic capital formation                     770

Consumption of fixed capital                       130

Rent                                               400

Interest                                           620

Mixed income of self-employed                      700

Net export                                         30

Govt. final consumption expenditure                1100

Operating surplus                                  1820

Employer's contribution to social security scheme  300

SOLUTION

By Expenditure method

GDPMP        = Private final consumption expenditure + Government final consumption
                 expenditure + Gross domestic capital formation (Net domestic capital
                 formation+ depreciation) + Net export

             = 2000 + 1100 + (770+ 130) + 30= 4030Crores

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                             6.25  a

NNPFC or NI = GDPMP- depreciation + NFIA ­ NIT

             = 4030 ­ 130 + 20 ­ 120= 3800 Crores

By Income method

NNPFC or NI = compensation of employees+ operating surplus+ Mixed income of self-
                       employed + NFIA

                   = 1200+ 1820+ 700+ 20= 3740Crores
ILLUSTRATION 14

From the following data calculate (a) Gross Domestic Product at Factor Cost, and (b) Gross
Domestic Product at Market price

Items                                                 ` in Crores

Gross national product at factor cost                 61,500

Net exports                                           (-) 50

Compensation of employees                             3000

Rent                                                                800

Interest                                                            900

Profit                                                1,300
Net indirect taxes                                      300
Net domestic capital formation                          800

Gross domestic capital formation                                    900

Factor income to abroad                                             80

SOLUTION

(a) GDP at factor cost =               NDP at factor cost + Depreciation

                           =           Compensation of employees+ Rent+ Interest + Profit

                                       + Mixed income+ (Gross domestic capital formation - Net

                                       domestic capital formation)

                           =           ` 3,000 + ` 800 + ` 900 + ` 1,300 + (` 900 - ` 800)

                           =           ` 6100 Crores

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         a       6.26         BUSINESS ECONOMICS

(b) Gross Domestic Product at Market Price

       = GDP at factor cost + Net Indirect taxes =` 6100 + ` 300

       = 6400 Crores

ILLUSTRATION 15

Calculate NNPFC. By expenditure method with the help of following information-

Items                                                  ` in Crores

Private final consumption expenditure                  10

Net Import                                             20

Public final consumption expenditure                   05

Gross domestic fixed capital formation                 350

Depreciation                                           30

Subsidy                                                100

Income paid to abroad                                  20

Change in stock                                        30

Net acquisition of valuables                           10

SOLUTION

Calculation of national income by expenditure method:

GDPMP = Government final consumption expenditure (Public final consumption expenditure) +
             Private final consumption expenditure + Gross domestic capital formation (Gross
             domestic fixed capital formation + change stock + Net acquisition of valuables) + Net
             export (Note: As net import is20, hence, net export is -20)

       = 5 +10 + [350 + 30 +10 ]+(- 20) = 5+10+390-20 = 385 Crores

NNPFC = GDPMP ­ Depreciation + Net factor income from abroad (Income from abroad ­ Income
             paid to abroad) ­ Net Indirect tax (Indirect tax ­ subsidies)

       = 385 ­ 30 + [0 ­ 20] ­ [0-100] = 385 ­ 30 ­ 20 + 100 = 435 Crores.

     1.5 THE SYSTEM OF REGIONAL ACCOUNTS IN INDIA

Regional accounts provide an integrated database on the innumerable transactions taking
place in the regional economy and help decision making at the regional level. At present,
practically all the states and union territories of India compute state income estimates and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                   6.27  a

district level estimates. State Income or Net State Domestic Product (NSDP) is a measure in
monetary terms of the volume of all goods and services produced in the state within a given
period of time (generally a year) accounted without duplication. Per Capita State Income is
obtained by dividing the NSDP (State Income) by the midyear projected population of the
state.

The state level estimates are prepared by the State Income Units of the respective State
Directorates of Economics and Statistics (DESs). The Central Statistical Organisation assists the
States in the preparation of these estimates by rendering advice on conceptual and
methodological problems. In the preparation of state income estimates, certain activities such
as railways, communications, banking and insurance and central government administration,
that cut across state boundaries, and thus their economic contribution cannot be assigned to
any one state directly are known as the `Supra-regional sectors' of the economy. The estimates
for these supra regional activities are compiled for the economy as a whole and allocated to
the states on the basis of relevant indicators.

    1.6 GDP AND WELFARE

Can the GDP of a country be taken as an index of the welfare of people in that country? There
are many reasons to dispute the validity of GDP as a perfect measure of well-being. In fact,
GDP measures our ability to obtain many requirements to make our life better; yet leave out
many important aspects which ensure good quality of life for all. GDP measures exclude the
following which are critical for the overall wellbeing of citizens.

(a) Income distributions and, therefore, GDP per capita is a completely inadequate
         measure of welfare. Countries may have significantly different income distributions
         and, consequently, different levels of overall well-being for the same level of per capita
         income.

(b) Quality improvements in systems and processes due to technological as well as
         managerial innovations which reflect true growth in output from year to year.

(c) Productions hidden from government authorities, either because those engaged in it
         are evading taxes or because it is illegal (drugs, gambling etc.).

(d) Nonmarket production (with a few exceptions) and Non-economic contributors to
         well-being for example: health of a country's citizens, education levels, political
         participation, or other social and political factors that may significantly affect well-
         being levels.

(e) The disutility of loss of leisure time. We know that, other things remaining the same, a
         country's GDP rises if the total hours of work increase.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.28  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

(f) Economic 'bads' for example: crime, pollution, traffic congestion etc which make us
         worse off.

(g) The volunteer work and services rendered without remuneration undertaken in the
         economy, even though such work can contribute to social well-being as much as paid
         work.

(h) Many things that contribute to our economic welfare such as, leisure time, fairness,
         gender equality, security of community feeling etc.,

(i) Both positive and negative externalities which are external effects that do not form
         part of market transactions

(j) The distinction between production that makes us better off and production that only
         prevents us from becoming worse off, for e.g. defence expenditures such as on police
         protection. Increased expenditure on police due to increase in crimes may increase
         GDP but these expenses only prevent us from becoming worse off. However, no
         reflection is made in national income of the negative impacts of higher crime rates. As
         another example, automobile accidents result in production of repairs, output of
         medical services, insurance, and legal services all of which are production included in
         GDP just as any other production.

    1.7 LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES OF NATIONAL
             INCOME COMPUTATION

There are innumerable limitations and challenges in the computation of national income. The
task is more complex in underdeveloped and developing countries. Following are the general
dilemmas in measurement of national income.
There are many conceptual difficulties related to measurement which are difficult to resolve,
such as:
(a) lack of an agreed definition of national income,
(b) accurate distinction between final goods and intermediate goods,
(c) issue of transfer payments,
(d) services of durable goods,
(e) difficulty of incorporating distribution of income,
(f) valuation of a new good at constant prices, and
(g) valuation of government services

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                                    6.29  a

Other challenges relate to:
(a) Inadequacy of data and lack of reliability of available data,
(b) presence of non-monetised sector,
(c) production for self-consumption,
(d) absence of recording of incomes due to illiteracy and ignorance,
(e) lack of proper occupational classification, and
(f) accurate estimation of consumption of fixed capital

SUMMARY

  National income accounts are extremely useful for analyzing and evaluating the

  performance of an economy, knowing the composition and structure of the national

  income, income distribution, economic forecasting and for choosing economic policies

  and evaluating them.

  Gross domestic product (GDP MP) is a measure of the market value of all final economic

  goods and services, gross of depreciation, produced within the domestic territory of a

  country during a given time period gross of depreciation.

  Capital goods (business plant and equipment purchases) and inventory investment--

  the net change in inventories of final goods awaiting sale or of materials used in the

  production are counted in GDP

  To eliminate the effect of prices, in addition to computing GDP in terms of current

  market prices, termed `nominal GDP' or GDP at current prices,the national income

  accountants also calculate `real GDP 'or GDP at constant prices which is the value of

  domestic product in terms of constant prices of a chosen base year.

  GNP MP = GDP MP + Net Factor Income from Abroad

  NDP MP = GDP MP - Depreciation

  NDP MP =NNP MP - Net Factor Income from Abroad

  NNP MP = GNP MP - Depreciation

  Market Price = Factor Cost + Net Indirect Taxes= Factor Cost + Indirect Taxes ­

  Subsidies

  Gross Domestic Product at Factor Cost (GDPFC) = GDP MP ­ Indirect Taxes + Subsidies

  Net Domestic Product at Factor Cost (NDPFC)is defined asthe total factor incomes

  earned by the factors of production.

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  a   6.30  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

  Net National Product at Factor Cost (NNPFC)or National Income

  NNPFC = National Income = FID (factor income earned in domestic territory) + NFIA.

  Personal income is a measure of the actual current income receipt of persons from all

  sources. Disposable Personal Income (DI) that is available for their consumption or

  savings DI = PI - Personal Income Taxes

  Circular flow of income refers to the continuous interlinked phases in circulation of

  production, income generation and expenditure involving different sectors of the

  economy.

  Product Method or Value Added Method is also called Industrial Origin Method or Net

  Output Method and entails the consolidation of the production of each industry less

  intermediate purchases from all other industries.

  Under income method, national income is calculated by summation of factor incomes

  paid out by all production units within the domestic territory of a country as wages

  and salaries, rent, interest, and profit. Transfer incomes are excluded.

  Under the expenditure approach, also called Income Disposal Approach, national

  income is the aggregate final expenditure in an economy during an accounting year

  composed of final consumption expenditure (private& government), gross domestic

  capital formation and net exports.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Type Questions

1. The concept of `resident unit' involved in the definition of GDP denotes

  (a) A business enterprise which belongs to a citizen of India with production units solely
           situated in India

  (b) The unit having predominant economic interest in the economic territory of the
           country for one year or more irrespective of the nationality or legal status

  (c) A citizen household which had been living in India during the accounting year and
           one whose economic interests are solely in India

  (d) Households and business enterprises composed of citizens of India alone living in
           India during the accounting year

2. Read the following statements and answer the following question.

  I.  Intermediate consumption consists of the value of the goods and services consumed

      as inputs by a process of production,

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                       6.31  a

II. Intermediate consumption excludes fixed assets whose consumption is recorded as
         consumption of fixed capital.

(a) Only I is true

(b) Both I and II are true

(c) Only II is true

(d) Neither I nor II is true

3. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of any nation

(a) excludes capital consumption and intermediate consumption

(b) is inclusive of capital consumption or depreciation

(c) is inclusive of indirect taxes but excludes subsidies

(d) None of the above

4. Read the following statements

I.  `Value added' refers to the difference between value of output and purchase of

    intermediate goods.

II. `Value added' represents the contribution of labour and capital to the production
         process.

(a) Statements I and II are incorrect

(b) Statements I and II are correct

(c) Statement I is correct and II is incorrect

(d) Statement II is correct and I is incorrect

5. Non-economic activities are

(a) those activities whose value is excluded from national income calculation as it
         will involve double counting

(b) those which produce goods and services, but since these are not exchanged in a
         market transaction they do not command any market value

(c) those which do not involve production of goods and services as they are meant
         to provide hobbies and leisure time activities

(d) those which result in production for self consumption and therefore not included
         in national income calculation

6. Which of the following does not enter into the calculation of national income?

(a) Exchange of previously produced goods

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  6.32  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         (b) Exchange of second hand goods
         (c) Exchange of stocks and bonds
         (d) All the above
7. Which of the following enters into the calculation of national income?
         (a) The value of the services that accompany the sale
         (b) Additions to inventory stocks of final goods and materials
         (c) Stocks and bonds sold during eth current year
         (d) (a) and (b) above
8. Gross National Product at market prices GNP MP is
         (a) GDP MP + Net Factor Income from Abroad
         (b) GDP MP - Net Factor Income from Abroad
         (c) GDP MP - Depreciation
         (d) GDP MP + Net Indirect Taxes
9. Choose the correct statement
         (a) GNP includes earnings of Indian corporations overseas and Indian residents

                   working overseas; but GDP does not include these
         (b) NNPFC = National Income = FID (factor income earned in domestic

                   territory) ­ NFIA.
         (c) Capital goods and inventory investment are excluded from computation of GDP
         (d) NDPMP = GDPMP + Depreciation
10. The basis of distinction between market price and factor cost is
         (a) net factor income from abroad
         (b) net indirect taxes (i.e., Indirect taxes - Subsidies)
         (c) net indirect taxes (i.e., Indirect taxes + Subsidies)
         (d) depreciation ( consumption of fixed capital)
11. If net factor income from abroad is positive, then
         (a) national income will be greater than domestic factor incomes.
         (b) national income will be less than domestic factor incomes.
         (c) net exports will be negative

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL INCOME                               6.33  a

         (d) domestic factor incomes will be greater than national income
12. The GDP per capita is

         (a) a measure of a country's economic output per person
         (b) actual current income receipts of persons
         (c) national income divided by population
         (d) (a)and (c) above
13. Which of the following is an example of transfer payment?
         (a) Old age pensions and family pensions
         (b) Scholarships given to deserving diligent students.
         (c) Compensation given for loss of property due to floods
         (d) All the above
14. Mixed income of the self -employed means
         (a) net profits received by self -employed people
         (b) outside wages received by self- employed people
         (c) combined factor payments which are not distinguishable,
         (d) wages due to non- economic activities
15. Which of the following is added to national income while calculating personal income?
         (a) Transfer payments to individuals
         (b) Undistributed profits of corporate
         (c) Transfer payments made to foreigners
         (d) Mixed income of self employed

ANSWERS

1.   (b) 2.   (b) 3.                               (b) 4.   (b) 5.        (b)

6.   (d) 7.   (d) 8.                               (a) 9.   (a) 10.       (b)

11.  (a) 12.  (d) 13.                              (d) 14.  (c) 15.       (a)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
