                                                   PUBLIC1F.I2N3ANCE  7.23

    UNIT ­ 2: MARKET FAILURE/
GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION TO

    CORRECT MARKET FAILURE

                                         LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you will be able to ­
· Define the concept of market failure
· Describe the different sources of market failure
· Explain various government interventions for correcting market

       failure

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

    2.1 INTRODUCTION

The market is an environment where buyers and sellers transact or exchange goods and
services. Economists presume that people will make choices in their own self-interest. They
will choose those things that provide the greatest personal benefit, and keep themselves away
from those that are not valuable and worth seeking. In other words, individuals will behave
rationally.
The general belief is that since rational individuals act to maximise self interest, a perfectly
working market system is, by default, efficient and will effectively allocate scarce economic
resources in the best possible manner. In other words, in a well functioning market, prices
provide the accurate signals to producers and consumers and the right quantity of whatever
consumers choose to consume will be produced and supplied at the right price. However, this
is not always true. Under certain circumstances, `market failure' occurs, i.e. the market fails to
allocate resources efficiently and therefore, market outcomes become inefficient.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.     7.24                    BUSINESS ECONOMICS

       2.2 THE CONCEPT OF MARKET FAILURE

   The inefficient allocation of resources in an economy is described as market failure. The term
   "market failure" does not mean the market is not working at all, it only means that the market
   does not function in the way that it should. Market failure is a situation in which the free
   market leads to misallocation of society's scarce resources in the sense that there is either
   overproduction or underproduction of particular goods and services leading to a less than
   optimal outcome. There are two types of market failure namely;

   1. Complete market failure. This is a case of "missing markets" and occurs when the
            market does not supply products at all despite the fact that such products and services
            are wanted by people. E.g. Pure public goods.

   2. Partial market failure occurs when the market does actually function, but it produces
            either the wrong quantity of a product or at the wrong price. This results in loss of
            economic welfare.

      2.3 WHY DO MARKETS FAIL?

   The pertinent question here is why do markets fail? Or why do markets fail to produce the
   ideal outcome that economic theory predicts? Perfectly competitive markets will generate
   outcomes in which the economy's resources are allocated to their `highest valued uses' and
   no one person can be made better off without making at least another person worse off.

   Though perfectly competitive markets work efficiently, in the real world, conditions necessary
   for efficient outcome namely, perfect competition is not practical. We know that conditions
   such as large number of small firms, perfect knowledge, homogenous products etc. are not
   generally present in most markets. We shall first try to understand why markets fail and then
   proceed to identify the role of government in dealing with market failure.

   There are four major reasons for market failure. They are:

   ·  Market power,

   ·  Externalities,

   ·  Public goods, and

   ·  Incomplete information

   We shall discuss each of the above in detail.

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I2N5ANCE  7.25

2.3.1 Market Power

Market power or monopoly power is the ability of a firm to profitably raise the market price
of a good or service over its marginal cost. Firms that have market power are price makers
and therefore, can charge a price that gives them positive economic profits. Excessive market
power causes the single producer or a small number of producers to restrict output (i.e
produce and sell less output than would be produced in a competitive market) and charge
price higher than what would prevail under perfect competition. These profits are not achieved
due to operating efficiency, but due to market power and dominance. Thus, market fails to
produce the right quantity of goods and services at the right price.

2.3.2 Externalities

We begin by describing externalities and then proceed to discuss how they create market
inefficiencies. As we are aware, anything that one individual does, may have, at the margin,
some effect on others. For example, if individuals decide to switch from consumption of
ordinary vegetables to consumption of organic vegetables, they would, other things equal,
increase the price of organic vegetables and potentially reduce the welfare of existing
consumers of organic vegetables. However, we should note that all these operate through
price mechanism i.e. through changes in prices. The price system works efficiently because
market prices convey information to both producers and consumers. However, when a
consumption or production activity has an indirect effect (either positive or negative) on
consumption or production activities of others and such effects are not reflected directly in
market prices, we call it an externality.

Externalities are costs (negative externalities) or benefits (positive externalities), which are not
reflected in free market prices. They are called externalities because they are "external" to the
market. Externalities are also referred to as 'spillover effects', 'neighbourhood effects' 'third -
party effects' or 'side-effects', as the originator of the externality imposes costs or benefits on
others who are not responsible for initiating the effect. Since it occurs outside the price
mechanism, it has not been compensated for, or in other words it is uninternalized or the cost
(benefit) of it is not borne (paid) by the parties.

Externalities can be positive or negative. Negative externalities occur when the action of one
party imposes costs on another party. Positive externalities occur when the action of one party
confers benefits on another party.

Production Externalities

A negative production externality initiated in production which imposes an external cost on
others may be received by another in consumption or in production. As an example,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.               7.26          BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   ·  A negative production externality is received in consumption when a factory which

      produces aluminium discharges untreated waste water into a nearby river and pollutes

      the water causing health hazards for people who use the water for drinking and

      bathing.

   ·  A negative production externality is received in production when pollution of river

      affects fish output as there will be less catch for fishermen due to loss of fish resources.

   The firm, however, has no incentive to account for the external costs that it imposes on
   consumers of river water or on fishermen when making its production decision. Additionally,
   these external costs are never reflected in the price of the product.

   A positive production externality initiated in production that confers external benefits on
   others may be received in production or in consumption.

   ·  A firm which offers training to its employees for increasing their skills generates

      positive benefits on other firms when they hire such workers as they change their jobs.

   ·  A positive production externality is received in consumption when an individual raises

      an attractive garden and the persons walking by enjoy the garden. These external

      effects were not in fact taken into account when the production decisions were made.

   Consumption Externalities

   Negative consumption externalities initiated in consumption which produce external costs on
   others may be received in consumption or in production.

   ·  smoking cigarettes in public place causing passive smoking by others, creating litter

      and diminishing the aesthetic value of the room and playing the radio loudly

      obstructing one from enjoying a concert are examples of negative consumption

      externalities affecting consumption

   ·  The act of undisciplined students talking and creating disturbance in a class preventing

      teachers from making effective instruction and the case of excessive consumption of

      alcohol causing impairment in efficiency for work and production are instances of

      negative consumption externalities affecting production.

   A positive consumption externality initiated in consumption that confers external benefits on
   others may be received in consumption or in production.

   ·  if people get immunized against contagious diseases, they would confer a social

      benefit to others as well by preventing others from getting infected.

   ·  Consumption of the services of a health club by the employees of a firm would result

      in an external benefit to the firm in the form of increased efficiency and productivity.

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I2N7ANCE  7.27

When there are externalities and the costs or benefits are experienced by people outside a
transaction, the actors in the transaction (consumers or producers) tend to ignore those
external costs or benefits.

Having discussed the nature of externalities in production and consumption, we shall now
examine how externalities cause inefficiency and market failure. Before we attempt this, we
need to understand the difference between private costs and social costs. Private cost is the
money cost of production incurred by the firm i.e. costs such as wages, raw materials, heating
and lighting which must be paid to carry out production, and these which would appear in
the firm's accounts. The supply curve here corresponds to only the private marginal costs.

Social costs refer to the total costs to the society on account of a production or consumption
activity. Social costs are private costs borne by individuals directly involved in a transaction
together with the external costs borne by third parties not directly involved in the transaction.
In other words, social costs are the total costs incurred by the society when a good is
consumed or produced. It is thus private costs plus costs to third parties (i.e. private costs +
total negative externalities).

                   Social Cost = Private Cost + External Cost

The external costs are not included in firms' income statements or consumers' decisions.
However, these external costs are real and important as far as the society is concerned. As we
have mentioned above, firms do not have to pay for the damage resulting from the pollution
which they generate. As a result, each firm's cost which is considered for determining output
would be only private cost or direct cost of production which does not incorporate
externalities.

The market prices determined without incorporating externalities are not ideal as they do not
reflect all social costs and benefits. Such prices send incorrect signals to producers and
consumers and cause either overproduction or underproduction. Thus, we conclude that
when there is externality, a competitive market will produce a level of output which is not
socially optimal. This is a clear case of market failure.

    2.4 PUBLIC GOODS

Paul A. Samuelson who introduced the concept of `collective consumption good' in his path-
breaking 1954 paper `The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure' is usually recognized as the first
economist to develop the theory of public goods. A public good (also referred to as collective
consumption good or social good) is defined as one which all enjoy in common in the sense
that each individual's consumption of such a good leads to no subtraction from any other
individuals' consumption of that good.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.  7.28  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   Most of the goods produced and consumed in an economy are private goods. Since they are
   scarce, anyone who wants to consume them must purchase them at a price. Private goods do
   not face any have free-rider problem. Private goods are `excludable' i.e. it is possible to
   exclude or prevent consumers who have not paid for them from consuming them or having
   access to them. Consumption of private goods is `rivalrous' that is the purchase and
   consumption of a private good by one individual prevents another individual from consuming
   it. Normally, the market will efficiently allocate resources for the production of private goods.
   A few examples are: food items, clothing, movie ticket, television, cars, houses etc.

   Public goods are products (goods or services) whose consumption is essentially collective in
   nature. Public good is non-rival in consumption. It means that consumption of a public good
   by one individual does not reduce the quality or quantity available for all other individuals.
   For example, if, you eat your apple, (a private good) another person too cannot eat it. But, if
   you walk in street light, other persons too can walk without any reduced benefit from the
   street light.

   Public goods are non-excludable. Consumers cannot (at least at less than prohibitive cost) be
   excluded from consumption benefits. If the good is provided, one individual cannot deny
   another individuals' consumption. For example, national defence once provided, it is
   impossible to exclude anyone within the country from consuming and benefiting from it.

   Public goods are characterized by indivisibility. Each individual may consume all of the good
   i.e. the total amount consumed is the same for each individual. Once a public good is provided,
   the additional resource cost of another person consuming the goods is `zero'. No direct
   payment by the consumer is involved in the case of pure public goods. A few examples of
   public goods are: national defence, highways, public education, scientific research which
   benefits everyone, law enforcement, lighthouses, fire protection, disease prevention and
   public sanitation.

   Public goods are generally more vulnerable to issues such as externalities, inadequate
   property rights, and free rider problems. The absence of excludability in the case of public
   goods and the tendency of people to act in their own self-interest will lead to the problem of
   free-riding. There is no incentive for people to pay for the good because they can consume it
   without paying for it. Since private goods are excludable, free-riding mostly occurs in the case
   of public goods.

   If individuals make no offer to pay for public goods, there is market failure in the case of these
   goods and the profit-maximizing firms will not produce them. Producers are not motivated to
   produce a socially-optimal amount of products if they cannot charge a positive price for them
   or make profits from them. As such, though public goods are extremely valuable for the well-
   being of the society, left to the market, they will not be produced at all or will be grossly
   under-produced. Thus, there is market failure in the case of public goods.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                      PUBLIC1F.I2N9ANCE  7.29

   2.5 INCOMPLETE INFORMATION

Complete information is an important element of a competitive market. Perfect information
implies that both buyers and sellers have complete information about anything that may
influence their decision making. However, this assumption is not fully satisfied in real markets
because of

·  complexity of products and services (e.g. cardiac surgery, financial products like mutual

   funds),

·  difficulty of getting correct information, and

·  deliberate misinformation by interested parties (e.g. highly persuasive advertisements).

   Information failure results in market failure.

2.5.1 Asymmetric Information

Asymmetric information occurs when there is an imbalance in information between the buyer
and the seller i.e. when the buyer knows more than the seller or the seller knows more than
the buyer. This can distort choices. For example,

·  the landlords know more about their properties than the tenants,

·  a borrower knows more about their ability to repay a loan than the lender,

·  a used-car seller knows more about the vehicle quality than the buyer,

·  health insurance buyers know more about their state of health than the insurance

   companies and

·  some traders may possess insider information in financial markets.

These are situations in which one party to a transaction knows a material fact that the other
party does not. This phenomenon is an important source of market failure. Adverse selection
and moral hazard are two central concepts related to the problem of information gaps in
many markets

Adverse Selection

Asymmetric information generates adverse selection and affects a transaction before it occurs.
When one party to a contract or negotiation, say X, possesses information relevant to the
contract or negotiation that the other party Y does not have, the expected value of the
transaction is known more accurately to X due to asymmetry of information. Then, the party
which has more information i.e. X may take advantage Y's ignorance and this could potentially
put the ignorant party Y at a loss.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.  7.30  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   For example, in the insurance market, if the health insurance companies could costlessly
   identify the health risks of buyers, then there is no asymmetric information and therefore,
   insurers could offer low premiums to the low-risk buyers and high premiums to the high-risks
   buyers. As a matter of fact, compared to insurance buyers, insurance companies know less
   about the health conditions of buyers and are therefore unable to differentiate between high-
   risk and low-risk persons.

   Due to the tendency of people with higher health risks to obtain insurance coverage to a
   greater extent than persons with lesser risk, the proportion of unhealthy people in the pool
   of insured people increases. In such situations, an insurance company extends insurance
   coverage to an applicant whose actual risk is substantially higher than the risk known by the
   insurance company.

   By not revealing the actual state of health, an applicant is leading the insurance company to
   make decisions on coverage or premium costs that are `adverse' to the insurance company's
   management of financial risk. Due to heavy insurance claims, the premium of insurance rises
   so that the more healthy people being aware of their low risks choose not to be insured. This
   further increases the proportion of unhealthy people among the insured, thus raising the price
   of insurance upwards. The process continues until most people who want to buy insurance
   are unhealthy.

   Having more unhealthy insurance buyers make insurance very expensive. In the extreme case,
   the insurance companies stop selling the insurance leading to `missing' markets. If the sellers
   wish to do business profitably, they may have to incur considerable costs in terms of time and
   money for identifying the extent of risk for different buyers which in turn would increase
   insurance premium.

   When dealing with problems of asymmetric information, the most frequently cited and
   studied example in Economics is the `lemons problem' developed by George Akerlof in
   relation to the used car market. Second-hand cars may be good quality cars or poor quality
   cars defined as "lemons". The owner of a car knows much more about its quality than anyone
   else. While placing it for sale, he may not disclose all that he knows about the mechanical
   defects of the vehicle. Based on the probability that the car on sale is a `lemon', the buyers'
   willingness to pay for any particular car will be based on the `average quality' of used cars.
   Since there is quality uncertainty, to account for this risk, the price offered for any used car is
   likely to be less.

   Since the price offered in the market is lower than the acceptable one, sellers of good quality
   cars will not be inclined to place the car for sale sell in the used car market. They are kept by
   their owners or sold only to relatives or friends. The good-quality cars disappear from the
   market and the market becomes flooded with `lemons' and eventually the market may offer
   nothing but `lemons'. This is the case of market failure because the market has only lower

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I3N1ANCE  7.31

prices and lower average quality of cars. With asymmetric information, just as low quality high
risk buyers drive out high quality low risk buyers of insurance, low-quality cars can drive high-
quality cars out of the market.

Thus, asymmetric information leads to elimination of high-quality goods from the market.
Economic agents end up either selecting a sub-standard product or leaving the market
altogether.

Moral Hazard

Moral hazard arises whenever there is an externality (i.e., whenever an economic agent can
shift some of its costs to others). It is about actions made after making a market exchange
which may have adverse impact on the less-informed person. In other words, it is about the
opportunism characterized by an informed person's taking advantage of a less-informed
person through an unobserved action. It arises from lack of information about someone's
future behaviour. It occurs when one party to an agreement knows that he need not bear the
consequences of his bad behaviour or poor decision making and that the consequence, if any,
would be borne by the other party. Therefore, he engages in risky behaviour or fails to act i n
good faith or acts in a different way than if he had to bear those consequences by himself.

In the insurance market, moral hazard refers to a situation that increases the probability of
occurrence of a loss or a larger than normal loss because of a change in the insurance policy
holders' behaviour after buying the policy. For example, a driver who has a comprehensive
insurance tends to be less careful while driving and may increase the probability of insurance
claims. When someone is protected from paying the full costs of their harmful actions, they
tend to act irresponsibly, making the harmful consequences more likely.

In the case of medical insurance, the more one's costs are covered by the insurance company,
the less he cares whether the doctor charges excessive fees or uses inefficient and costly
procedures as part of his health care. This causes insurance premiums to rise for everyone,
driving many potential customers out of the market.

If the company could costlessly monitor the behaviour of the insured, it can charge higher
fees for those who make more claims. The problem lies in the fact that the insurance company
cannot observe people's actions post-sale and therefore cannot judge without costly
monitoring whether occurrence of an accident is genuine or the outcome of lack of caution
on the part of the insured. Therefore the expected outflow in terms of insurance claims is
higher and the insurance companies may be forced to increase premiums for everyone or
may, at the extreme, even refuse to sell insurance at all in which case it is a case of missing
markets.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.     7.32                 BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   Having discussed market failure in detail, we shall now look into the intervention mechanisms
   which governments adopt for combating market failures so as to ensure greater welfare to
   the society.

   The existence of a free market does not altogether eliminate the need for government
   intervention for the efficient functioning of markets. Government can ensure economic
   efficiency by providing the necessary legal and regulatory system that facilitates efficiency
   and /or it can intervene to correct specific market failures. The role of the government is
   discussed below.

   Government plays a vital role in ensure a well functioning market by:

   ·  creating the necessary physical infrastructure such as roads, bridges, airports and

      waterways

   ·  provision of institutional infrastructure such as legal and regulatory framework,

      establishment of the `rule of law', protection of property rights, ensuring performance

      of contracts are to

   ·  ensuring an appropriately framed competition and consumer law framework that

      regulates the activities of firms and individuals in their market exchanges

   We shall try to have a discussion on the forms of government intervention to address market
   failure.

      2.6 GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION TO MINIMIZE
               MARKET POWER

   Because of the social costs imposed by monopoly, governments intervene by establishing
   rules and regulations designed to promote competition and prohibit actions that are likely to
   restrain competition. These legislations differ from country to country. For example, in India,
   we have the Competition Act, 2002 (as amended by the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2007)
   to promote and sustain competition in markets. The Antitrust laws in the US and the
   Competition Act, 1998 of UK etc are designed to promote competitive economy by prohibiting
   actions that are likely to restrain competition. Such legislations generally aim at prohibiting
   contracts, combinations and collusions among producers or traders which are in restraint of
   trade and other anticompetitive actions such as predatory pricing.

   Other measures include:

   ·  Market liberalisation by introducing competition in previously monopolistic sectors

      such as energy, telecommunication etc.

   ·  Controls on mergers and acquisitions if there is possible market domination

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                      PUBLIC1F.I3N3ANCE  7.33

·  Price capping and price regulation

·  Profit or rate of return regulation

·  Patronage to consumer associations

·  Tough investigations into cartelisation and unfair practices such as collusion and

   predatory pricing

·  Restrictions on monopsony power of firms

·  Reduction in import controls and

·  Nationalisation

However, sometimes we find that governments protect monopoly positions of firms that have
developed unique innovations. For example, patent and copyright laws grant exclusive rights
of products or processes to provide incentives for invention and innovation.

Another example is that of permitted natural monopoly. Natural monopolies can produce the
entire output of the market at a cost that is lower than what it would be if there were s everal
firms. Examples of such natural monopoly are electricity, gas and water supplies. In order to
control the market power of such natural monopolies, governments usually regulate the price
of the goods and services provided by them.

    2.7 GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION TO CORRECT
             EXTERNALITIES

As you may easily recall, freely functioning markets produce externalities because producers
and consumers need to consider only their private costs and benefits and not the full social
costs. To promote the overall welfare of all members of society, social returns should be
maximized and social costs minimized. This implies that all costs and benefits (both private
and external) need to be internalized by consumers and producers while making buying and
production decisions.

An externality is internalised if the ones that generated the externality incorporate into their
private or internal cost- benefit calculations the external benefits (in the case of positive
externality) and external costs (in the case of negative externality) that third parties bear. In
other words, the key to internalizing an externality (both external costs and benefits) is to
ensure that those who create the externalities include them while making decisions.

Governments have numerous methods to reduce the effects of negative externalities and to
promote positive externalities. We shall first examine how government regulation can deal
with the inefficiencies that arise from negative externalities. Since the most commonly referred
negative externality is pollution, we shall take it as an example in the following discussion.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.               7.34  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   Government initiatives towards negative externalities may be classified as:

   1. Direct controls or regulations that openly regulate the actions of those involved in
            generating negative externalities, and

   2. `Market-based' policies that would provide economic incentives

   Direct controls, also known as command solutions, prohibit specific activities that explicitly
   create negative externalities or require that the negative externality be limited to a certain
   level. A few examples are:

   ·  The government may, through legislation, fix emissions standard which is the legal

      limit on how much pollutant a firm can emit. If the firm exceeds the limit, it can invite

      monetary penalties or/and criminal liabilities.

   ·  Licensing, production quotas and mandates regarding acceptable production

      processes are other examples of direct intervention by governments.

   ·  Production, use and sale of many commodities and services are prohibited in our

      country.

   ·  Smoking is completely banned in many public places.

   ·  Stringent rules are in place in respect of tobacco advertising, packaging and labeling

      etc.

   ·  Governments may pass laws to alleviate the effects of negative externalities.

      Government stipulated environmental standards are rules that protect the

      environment by specifying actions by producers and consumers. For example, India

      has enacted the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

   ·  Government may limit the amounts of certain pollutants released into water and air by

      individual firms or make it mandatory to use pollution control devices.

   ·  Government may insist that the polluting firms install pollution-abatement

      mechanisms to ensure adherence to the emission standards. This means additional

      expenditure to the firm leading to rise in the firm's average cost. New firms will find it

      profitable to enter the industry only if the price of the product is greater than the

      average cost of production plus abatement expenditure.

   ·  Governments may also form special bodies/ boards to specifically address the problem:

      for instance the Ministry of Environment & Forest, the Pollution Control Board of India

      and the State Pollution Control Boards.

   The market-based approaches ­environmental taxes and cap-and-trade ­ operate through
   price mechanism to create an incentive for change. In other words, the government tries to
   alter the prices of goods through taxes and subsidies and thus change the behaviour of market

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                      PUBLIC1F.I3N5ANCE  7.35

participants. This is achieved by:

1. Setting the price directly through a pollution tax

2. Setting the price indirectly through the establishment of the cap-and-trade system.

One method of ensuring internalization of negative externalities is imposing pollution taxes.
These taxes are named Pigouvian taxes after A.C. Pigou. The size of the tax depends on the
amount of pollution a firm produces. These taxes have the effect of `making the polluter pay'.
Tax increases the private cost of production or consumption as the case may be, and would
decrease the quantity demanded and therefore the output of the good which creates negative
externality.

However, there are problems in administering an efficient pollution tax.

·  Pollution taxes are difficult to determine and administer because it involves the use of

   complex and costly administrative procedures for monitoring the polluters.

·  If the demand for the good is inelastic, the tax may have only an insignificant effect in

   reducing demand. In such cases, the producers will be able to easily shift the tax

   burden in the form of higher product prices.

·  Pollution taxes also have potential negative consequences on employment and

   investments because high pollution taxes in one country may encourage producers to

   shift their production facilities to those countries with lower taxes.

The second approach to establishing prices indirectly is `tradable emissions permits'. You
might have heard of `carbon credits'. The use of tradable permits to limit emissions is often
called `cap and trade'. A tradable permit is a license that allows a company to release a unit
of pollution into the environment over some period of time. By issuing a fixed number of
permits, the government determines the total level of pollution that can be legally emitted
during each period (the `cap'). Each firm has permits specifying the number of units of
emissions that the firm is allowed to generate. A firm that generates emissions above what is
allowed by the permit is penalized with substantial fines.

The firms can sell their government-issued permits to other firms in an organized market.
Since the permits are tradable (the firm can sell for a price), a polluting firm faces an
opportunity cost i.e. for each unit of pollution that it creates, it must either buy a permit, or it
must forgo the revenue it could earn by selling the permit to some other firm. A firm which
produces less pollution can sell their permits and earn money.

A firm whose technology would make it very costly to reduce pollution generally buys permits
in the market. At the same time, a firm whose technology enables it to discharge less pollution
or can reduce pollution rather cheaply will sell its permits.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.     7.36  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   The high polluters have to buy more permits, which increases their costs, and makes them less
   competitive and less profitable. The low polluters receive extra revenue from selling their
   surplus permits, which makes them more competitive and more profitable. Therefore, firms
   will have an incentive not to pollute.

   Tradable permits have been used since the early 1980s to reduce several types of pollution in
   the United States. In 1994 the United States began a cap and trade system for sulphur dioxide
   emissions that cause acid rain by issuing permits to power plants based on their historical
   consumption of coal. India does not have an explicit carbon price or a market-based
   mechanism such as cap-and-trade; but India has many schemes and mechanisms that put an
   implicit price on carbon. For example, the Perform, Achieve & Trade (PAT) scheme, carbon tax
   in the form of a cess on coal, lignite and peat, Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO) and
   Renewable Energy Certificates (REC), Internal Carbon Pricing (ICP) etc. In 2017, the coal cess
   was abolished and replaced by the GST compensation cess since it failed to achieve the
   desired outcomes. The Energy Conservation (Amendment) Bill, 2022 empowers the central
   government to specify a carbon credit trading scheme and to stipulate energy consumption
   standards.

   The cap and trade method is administratively cheap and simple to implement and ensures
   that pollution is minimised in the most cost-effective way. The `cap' puts a clear upper limit
   on the quantity of pollution that may be generated in each period. However, firms with a
   relatively inelastic demand for its product can easily shift the extra cost incurred for procuring
   additional permits in the form of higher price.

   The two interventions mentioned above i.e. permits and taxes make use of market forces to
   encourage consumers and producers to take externalities into account when planning their
   consumption and production. In other words, the polluters are forced to consider pollution as
   a private cost.

   So far we have been discussing about negative externality. We shall now look into positive
   externality. Though positive externality is associated with external benefits, we still call it a
   market failure because, left to market, there will be less than optimal output. Since positive
   externalities promote welfare, governments implement policies that promote positive
   externalities. When positive externalities are present, government may attempt to solve the
   problem through -

   ·  corrective subsidies to the producers aimed at increasing the supply of the good

   ·  corrective subsidies to consumers aimed at increasing the demand for the good.

   As we are aware, a corrective production subsidy involves government paying part of the cost
   to the firms in order to promote the production of goods having positive externalities. This is
   in fact a market-based policy as subsidies to producers would lower their cost of production.

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I3N7ANCE  7.37

E.g. fertilizer subsidy. A subsidy on fee for education is an example of consumption subsidy.

In the case of products and services whose externalities are vastly positive, the government
enters the market directly as an entrepreneur to produce and provide them. Public education,
health care and fundamental research are the obvious examples. Governments also engage in
direct production of environmental quality. Examples are: aforestation, reforestation,
protection of water bodies, treatment of sewage and cleaning of toxic waste sites.

    2.8 GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN THE CASE OF
             MERIT GOODS

Merit goods are goods that have substantial positive externalities and hence they are socially
desirable. Merit goods can be provided through the market, but are likely to be under-produced
and under-consumed through the market mechanism so that social welfare will not be
maximized. Examples of merit goods include education, health care, welfare services, housing,
fire protection, waste management, public libraries, museum, public parks etc.

The possible government responses to under-provision of merit goods are regulation,
subsidies, direct government provision and a combination of government provision and
market provision.

Regulation determines how a private activity may be conducted. For example, the way in
which education is to be imparted is government regulated. Governments can prohibit some
type of goods and activities, set standards and issue mandates making others oblige. For
example, government may make it compulsory to avail insurance protection. Compulsory
immunization may be insisted upon as it helps not only the individual but also the society
at large. Government could also use legislation to enforce the consumption of a good which
generates positive externalities. E.g. use of helmets, seat belts etc.

An additional option is to compel individuals to consume the good or service that generates
the external benefit. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009
which mandates free and compulsory education for every child of the age of six to fourteen
years is another example. If suspected of having a contagious disease such as COVID, an
individual may be forced to get medical treatment.

The ultimate encouragement to consume is to make the good completely free at the point
of consumption: for example freely available hospital treatment for various diseases. When
merit goods are directly provided free of cost by government, there will be substantial
demand for the same.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.             7.38        BUSINESS ECONOMICS

      2.9 GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN THE CASE OF
               DEMERIT GOODS

   Demerit goods are goods which are believed to be socially undesirable. Examples of demerit
   goods are cigarettes, alcohol, intoxicating drugs etc. The consumption of demerit goods
   imposes significant negative externalities on the society as a whole. However, it should be
   kept in mind that all goods with negative externalities are not essentially demerit goods; e.g.
   Production of steel causes pollution, but steel is not a socially undesirable good.

   The production and consumption of demerit goods are likely to be more than optimal under
   free markets. The government should therefore intervene in the marketplace to discourage
   their production and consumption. How do governments correct market failure resulting from
   demerit goods?

   ·  At the extreme, the government may enforce complete ban on a demerit good. e.g.

      the possession, trading or consumption of intoxicating drugs is made illegal.

   ·  Through persuasion which is mainly intended to be achieved by negative advertising

      campaigns which emphasize the dangers associated with consumption of demerit

      goods.

   ·  Through legislations that prohibit the advertising or promotion of demerit goods in

      whatsoever manner.

   ·  Strict regulations of the market for the good may be put in place so as to limit access

      to the good, especially by vulnerable groups such as children and adolescents.

   ·  Regulatory controls in the form of spatial restrictions e.g. smoking in public places,

      sale of tobacco to be away from schools, and time restrictions under which sale at

      particular times during the day is banned.

   ·  Imposing unusually high taxes on producing or purchasing the good making them very

      costly and unaffordable to many is perhaps the most commonly used method for

      reducing the consumption of a demerit good. Refer the GST rates in India for demerit

      goods, you will find how high they are.

   ·  The government can fix a minimum price below which the demerit good should not

      be exchanged.

   The demand for demerit goods such as, cigarettes and alcohol is often highly inelastic, so that
   any increase in their price resulting from additional taxation causes a less than proportionate
   decrease in demand. Also, sellers can always shift the taxes to consumers without losing
   customers.

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I3N9ANCE  7.39

The effect of stringent regulation such as total ban is seldom realized in the form of complete
elimination of the demerit good; conversely such goods are secretly driven underground and
traded in a hidden market.

    2.10 GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN THE CASE OF
             PUBLIC GOODS

Direct provision of a public good by government can help overcome the free-rider problem
which leads to market failure. The most important public goods like defence, establishment
and maintenance of legal system, fire protection, disease prevention etc are invariably
provided by the government.

Excludable public goods such as parks, universities, museums etc can be provided by
government and the same can be financed through entry fees. Government may grant licenses
to private firms to build a public good facility and charge fee from the user. In such cases,
the government regulates the level of entry fee chargeable from the public and keeps strict
watch on the functioning of the licensee to guarantee equitable distribution of welfare. Some
public goods are provided by voluntary contributions and private donations by corporate
entities and nongovernmental organisations.

Some goods are produced and consumed as public goods and services despite the fact that
they can be produced or consumed as private goods. This is because, left to the markets and
profit motives, these may prove dangerous to the society. Examples are scientific approval of
drugs, production of strategic products such as atomic energy, provision of security at airports
etc.

    2.11 PRICE INTERVENTION: NON-MARKET PRICING

Price intervention generally takes the form of price controls which are legal restrictions on
price. Price controls may take the form of either a price floor (a minimum price buyers are
required to pay) or a price ceiling (a maximum price sellers are allowed to charge for a good
or service). Fixing of minimum wages and rent controls are examples of such market
intervention.

Government usually intervenes in many primary markets which are subject to extreme as well
as unpredictable fluctuations in price. For example in India, in the case of many crops the
government has initiated the Minimum Support Price (MSP) programme as well as
procurement by government agencies at the set support prices. The objective is to guarantee
steady and assured incomes to farmers.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.     7.40            BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   When prices of certain essential commodities rise excessively, government may resort to
   controls in the form of price ceilings (also called maximum price) for making a resource or
   commodity available to all at reasonable prices. For example: maximum prices of food grains
   and essential items are set by government during times of scarcity.

   With the objective of ensuring stability in prices and distribution, governments often intervene
   in grain markets by building and maintenance of buffer stocks. It involves purchases from the
   market during good harvest and releasing stocks during periods when production is below
   average.

      2.12 GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION FOR CORRECTING
               INFORMATION FAILURE

   Governments actively intervene in the market for combating the problem of market failure
   due to information problems and considering the importance of information in making
   rational choices. A few examples are:

   ·  Government makes it mandatory to have accurate labeling and content disclosures by

      producers. E.g. Labeling on cigarette packets, display of nutritional information on

      food packages.

   ·  Mandatory disclosure of information, for example: SEBI requires that accurate

      information be provided to prospective buyers of new stocks.

   ·  Public dissemination of information to improve knowledge

   ·  Regulation of advertising and setting of advertising standards to make advertising

      more responsible, informative and less persuasive.

       2.13 GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION FOR EQUITABLE
                DISTRIBUTION

   One of the most important activities of the government is to redistribute incomes so that
   there is equity and fairness in the society. Some common policy interventions include:
   progressive income tax, targeted budgetary allocations, unemployment compensation,
   transfer payments, subsidies, social security schemes, job reservations, land reforms, gender
   sensitive budgeting etc.

   Government also intervenes to combat black economy and market distortions associated with
   a parallel black economy. Government intervention in a market that reduces efficiency while
   increasing equity is often justified because equity is greatly appreciated by society.

      © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                      PUBLIC1F.I4N1ANCE  7.41

The discussion above is far from being comprehensive; yet it points toward the numerous
ways in which governments intervene in the markets. However, we cannot be sure whether
the government interventions would be effective or whether it would make the functioning of
the economy less efficient. Government failures where government intervention in the
economy to correct a market failure creates inefficiency and leads to a misallocation of scarce
resources occur very often. Government failure occurs when:

·  intervention is ineffective causing wastage of resources expended for the intervention

·  intervention produces fresh and more serious problems

There are costs and benefits associated with any government intervention in the market, and
it is important that policy makers consider all the costs and benefits of a policy intervention.

SUMMARY

 Market failure is a situation in which the free market leads to misallocation of society's
         scarce resources in the sense that there is either overproduction or underproduction
         of particular goods and services leading to a less than optimal outcome.

 There are two types of market failure: complete market failure or "missing markets"
         and partial market failure

 There are four major reasons for market failure. They are: market power, externalities,
         public goods, and incomplete information.

 Excessive market power causes the single producer or small number of producers to
         produce and sell less output than what would be produced in a competitive market
         and charge higher prices.

 Externalities also referred to as `spill over effects', `neighbourhood effects' `third-party
         effects', or `side-effects', occur when the actions of either consumers or producers
         result in costs or benefits that do not reflect as part of the market price.

 Externalities are initiated and experienced, not through the operation of the price
         system, but outside the market and therefore, are external to the market.

 Externalities can be positive or negative. Negative externalities occur when the action
         of one party imposes costs on a third party who is not part of the transaction. Positive
         externalities occur when the action of one party confers benefits a third party.

 The four possible types of externalities are: negative externality initiated in production
         which imposes an external cost on others; positive production externality, less
         commonly seen, initiated in production that confers external benefits on others;
         negative consumption externalities initiated in consumption which produce external

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.  7.42  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

            costs on others and positive consumption externality initiated in consumption that
            confers external benefits on others. Each of the above may be received by another in
            consumption or in production.

    Private cost is the cost faced by the producer or consumer directly involved in a
            transaction and includes direct cost of labour, materials, energy and other indirect
            overheads and does not incorporate externalities.

    Social cost is the entire cost which the society bears. Social Cost =Private Cost +
            External Cost.

    The firm or the consumer as the case may be, however, has no incentive to account for
            the external costs that it imposes on others.

    When firms do not have to worry about negative externalities associated with their
            production, the result is excess production and unnecessary social costs

    Public good (also referred to as a collective consumption good or a social good) are
            those which are indivisible, nonrival, non-excludable and enjoyed in common by all
            individuals. They are vulnerable to externalities and free rider problems.

    The incentive to let other people pay for a good or service, the benefits of which are
            enjoyed by an individual is known as the free rider problem.

    Private goods are `rivalrous' `and excludable' and less likely to have the free rider
            problem.

    Complete information is an essential element of competitive market.

    Asymmetric information occurs when there is an imbalance in information between the
            buyer and the seller i.e. when the buyer knows more than the seller or the seller knows
            more than the buyer. This can distort choices.

    Adverse selection is a situation in which asymmetric information about quality
            eliminates high-quality goods from a market. Buyers expect hidden problems in items
            offered for sale, leading to lower prices and the good quality items being kept off the
            market.

    Moral hazard is opportunism characterized by an informed person's taking advantage
            of a less-informed person through an unobserved action.

    Asymmetric information, adverse selection and moral hazard affect the ability of
            markets to efficiently allocate resources and therefore, lead to market failure because
            the party with better information has a competitive advantage.

    Governments intervene in various ways to correct market failure.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I4N3ANCE  7.43

 Because of the social costs imposed by monopoly, governments intervene by
         establishing rules and regulations designed to promote competition and prohibit
         actions that are likely to restrain competition.

 Natural monopolies such as electricity, gas and water supplies are usually subject to
         price controls.

 Government initiatives towards combating market failures due to negative externalities
         are either direct controls or market-based policies.

 Direct controls prohibit specific activities that explicitly create negative externalities or
         require that the negative externality be limited to a certain level, for instance limiting
         emissions.

 Government may pass laws to alleviate the effects of negative externalities or fix
         emissions standard which is a legal limit on how much pollutant a firm can emit. It may
         charge emission fee which is levied on each unit of a firm's emissions.

 The market-based approaches­ environmental taxes and cap-and-trade ­ operate
         through price mechanism to create an incentive for change.

 The key is to internalizing an externality (both external costs and benefits) is to ensure
         that those who create the externalities include them while making decisions.

 One method of ensuring internalization of negative externalities is imposing pollution
         taxes. (Pigouvian taxes). By `making the polluter pay', pollution taxes seek to internalize
         external costs into the price of a product or activity.

 Pollution taxes are difficult to determine and administer due to difficulty to discover
         the right level of taxation, problems associated with inelastic nature of demand for the
         good and the problem of possible capital flight.

 Tradable emission permits are marketable licenses to emit limited quantities of
         pollutants and can be bought and sold by polluters. The high polluters have to buy
         more permits and the low polluters receive extra revenue from selling their surplus
         permits.

 The system is administratively cheap and simple, allows flexibility and reward efficiency
         and provides strong incentives for innovation.

 Subsidy is a market-based policy and involves the government paying part of the cost
         to the firms in order to promote the production of goods having positive externalities.

 Merit goods such as education, health care etc are socially desirable and have
         substantial positive externalities. Left to the market, merit goods are likely to be under-
         produced and under- consumed so that social welfare will not be maximized.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.  7.44  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

    The possible government responses to under-provision of merit goods are regulation,
            legislation, subsidies, direct government provision and a combination of government
            provision and market provision.

    Demerit goods are goods which impose significant negative externalities on the society
            as a whole and are believed to be socially undesirable. The production and
            consumption of demerit goods are likely to be more than optimal under free markets.

    Steps taken by government to limit demerit goods include complete ban of the good,
            legislations, persuasion and advertising campaigns, limiting access to the good,
            especially by vulnerable groups.

    In the case of non excludable pure public goods where entry fees cannot be charged,
            direct provision by governments through the use of general government tax revenues
            is the only option.

    A very commonly followed method in the case of excludable public good is to grant
            licenses to private firms to build a facility and then the government regulates the level
            of the entry fee chargeable from the public.

    Due to strategic and security reasons, certain goods are produced and consumed as
            public goods and services despite the fact that they can be produced or consumed as
            private goods.

    Price controls may take the form of either a price floor (a minimum price buyers are
            required to pay) or a price ceiling (a maximum price sellers are allowed to charge for
            a good or service).

    When prices of certain essential commodities rise excessively government may resort
            to controls in the form of price ceilings (also called maximum price) for making a
            resource or commodity available to all at reasonable prices.

    With the objective of ensuring stability in prices and distribution, governments often
            intervene in grain markets through building and maintenance of buffer stocks.

    Government failure occurs when intervention is ineffective causing wastage of
            resources expended for the intervention and/or when intervention produces fresh and
            more serious problems. This creates inefficiency and leads to a misallocation of scare
            resources.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I4N5ANCE  7.45

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. `Market failure' is a situation which occurs when
         (a) private goods are not sufficiently provided by the market
         (b) public goods are not sufficiently provided by public sector
         (c) The market fail to form or they allocate resources efficiently
         (d) (b) and (c) above

2. Which of the following is an example of market failure?
         (a) Prices of goods tend to rise because of shortages
         (b) Merit goods are not sufficiently produced and supplied
         (c) Prices fall leading to fall in profits and closure of firms
         (d) None of the above

3. Which of the following is an outcome of market power?
         (a) makes price equal to marginal cost and produce a positive external benefit on
                   others
         (b) can cause markets to be efficient due to reduction in costs
         (c) makes the firms price makers and restrict output so as to make allocation
                   inefficient
         (d) (b) and(c) above

4. Markets do not exist
         (a) for goods which have positive externalities
         (b) for pure public goods
         (c) for goods which have negative externalities
         (d) none of the above

5. Which of the following is the right argument for provision of public good by government?
         (a) Governments have huge resources at their disposal
         (b) Public goods will never cause any type of externality
         (c) Markets are unlikely to produce sufficient quantity of public goods

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.  7.46  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

            (d) Provision of public goods are very profitable for any government
   6. Adequate amount of a pure public good will not be provided by the private market

            because of
            (a) the possibility of free riding
            (b) the existence of very low prices and low profits
            (c) governments would any way produce them, so there will be overproduction
            (d) there are restrictions as well as taxes on production of public goods
   7. The free rider problem arises because of
            (a) ability of participants to produce goods at zero marginal cost
            (b) marginal benefit cannot be calculated due to externalities present
            (c) the good or service is non excludable
            (d) general poverty and unemployment of people
   8. A chemical factory has full information regarding the risks of a product, but continues to
            sell it. This is possible because of
            (a) asymmetric information
            (b) moral hazard
            (c) free riding
            (d) (a) and (c) above
   9. If an individual tends to drive his car in a dangerously high speed because he has a
            comprehensive insurance cover, it is a case of
            (a) free riding
            (b) moral hazard
            (c) poor upbringing
            (d) Inefficiency
   10. Smoking in public is a case of
            (a) Negative consumption externality
            (b) Negative production externality
            (c) Internalising externality
            (d) None of the above

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I4N7ANCE  7.47

11. Read the following statements

I  The market-based approaches to control externalities operate through price

   mechanism

II. When externalities are present, the welfare loss would be eliminated

III. The key is to internalizing an externality is to ensure that those who create the
         externalities include them while making decisions

Of the above statements

(a) II and III are correct

(b) I only is correct

(c) II only is correct

(d) I and III are correct

12. Which of the following statements is false?

(a) Tradable permits provide incentive to innovate and reduce negative externalities

(b) A subsidy on a good which has substantial positive externalities would reduce its
         cost and consequently its price would be lower

(c) Substantial negative externalities are involved in the consumption of merit goods.

(d) Merit goods are likely to be under-produced and under consumed through the
         market mechanism

13. Which one of the following would you suggest for reducing negative externality?

(a) Production subsidies

(b) Excise duty

(c) Pigouvian taxes

(d) All of the above

14. A Pigouvian subsidy

(a) cannot be present when externalities are present

(b) is a good solution for negative externality as prices will increase

(c) is not measurable in terms of money and therefore not practical

(d) may help production to be socially optimal when positive externalities are present

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.  7.48  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   15. If governments make it compulsory to avail insurance protection, it is because
            (a) Insurance companies need to be running profitably
            (b) Insurance will generate moral hazard and adverse selection
            (c) Insurance is a merit good and government wants people to consume it
            (d) None of the above

   16. The Competition Act, 2002 aims to -
            (a) protect monopoly positions of firms that have developed unique innovations
            (b) to promote and sustain competition in markets
            (c) to determine pricing under natural monopoly.
            (d) None of the above

   17. Rules regarding product labelling
            (a) Seeks to correct market failure due to externalities
            (b) Is a method of solving the problem of public good
            (c) May help solve market failure due to information failure
            (d) Reduce the problem of monopolies in the product market

   18. Identify the incorrect statement
            (a) A minimum support price for agricultural goods is a market intervention method
                      to guarantee steady and assured incomes to farmers.
            (b) An externality is internalised if the ones that generated the externality
                      incorporate them into their private cost- benefit analysis
            (c) The production and consumption of demerit goods are likely to be less than
                      optimal under free markets
            (d) Compared to pollution taxes, the cap and trade method is administratively cheap
                      and simple to implement and ensures that pollution is minimised in the most
                      cost-effective way.

   19. The incentive to let other people pay for a good or service, the benefits of which are
            enjoyed by an individual
            (a) Is a case of negative externality
            (b) Is a case of market efficiency
            (c) Is a case of free riding

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                   PUBLIC1F.I4N9ANCE  7.49

(d) Is inappropriate and warrant action

20. A government subsidy

(a) is a market-based policy

(b) involves the government paying part of the cost to the firms in order to promote
         the production of goods having positive externalities

(c) is generally provided for merit goods

(d) all the above

21. The production and consumption of demerit goods are

(a) likely to be more than optimal under free markets.

(b) likely to be less than optimal under free markets

(c) likely to be subjected to price intervention by government

(d) a) and c) above

22. The argument for education subsidy is based on

(a) Education is costly

(b) the ground that education is merit good

(c) education creates positive externalities

(d) b) and c) above

23. Read the following statements

I.  Social costs are the total costs incurred by the society when a good is consumed

    or produced.

II  The external costs are not included in firms' income statements or consumers'

    decisions

III. Each firm's cost which is considered for determining output would be only private
         cost or direct cost of production which does not include external costs

IV. Production and consumption decisions are efficient only when private costs are
         considered

Of the above

(a) Statements I and III are correct

(b) Statements I,II and III are correct

(c) Statement I only is correct

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.           7.50       BUSINESS ECONOMICS

            (d) All the above are correct
   24. Government failure occurs when

            (a) Government fails to implement its election promises on policies
            (b) A government is unable to get reelected
            (c) Government intervention is ineffective and produces fresh and more serious

                      problems
            (d) None of the above

   ANSWERS

   1.  (c)  2     (b)  3                              (c)  4. (b) 5.  (c)  6.  (a)

   7. (c) 8. (a) 9. (b) 10. (a) 11. (d) 12. (c)

   13. (c) 14. (d) 15. (c) 16. (b) 17. (c) 18. (c)

   19. (c) 20. (d) 21. (d) 22. (d) 23. (b) 24. (c)

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
