.44  8.44  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

     UNIT - 3: MONETARY POLICY

                                              LEARNING OUTCOMES

     After studying this Unit, you will be able to ­
      Define monetary policy and describe its objectives
      Elucidate different components of the monetary policy framework
      Illustrate the analytics of monetary policy
      Explain the operating procedures and instruments of monetary

            policy, and
      Describe the organizational structure for monetary policy decisions

      UNIT OVERVIEW

                          Monetary Policy

     The Monetary Policy                                The Organisational Structure
           Framework                                    for Monetary Policy Decisions

     © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.45                                               MONEY MARKET  8.45

    3.1 INTRODUCTION

We observe that the Reserve Bank of India is occasionally manipulating policy rates for
manoeuvring liquidity conditions with reasons thereof explicitly notified. In fact, we have only
a limited understanding of the monetary phenomena which could strengthen or paralyse the
domestic economy. The discussion that follows is an attempt to throw light on the well-
acknowledged monetary measures undertaken by governments to fight economic instability.

    3.2 MONETARY POLICY DEFINED

Reserve Bank of India uses monetary policy to manage economic fluctuations and achieve
price stability, which means that inflation is low and stable. Reserve Bank of India conducts
monetary policy by adjusting the supply of money, usually through buying or selling securities
in the open market. Open market operations affect short-term interest rates, which in turn
influence longer-term rates and economic activity. When central banks lower interest rates,
monetary policy is easing. When it raises interest rates, monetary policy is tightening.

    3.3 THE MONETARY POLICY FRAMEWORK

The central bank, in its execution of monetary policy, functions within an articulated monetary
policy framework which has three basic components, viz.
(i) the objectives of monetary policy,
(ii) the analytics of monetary policy which focus on the transmission mechanisms, and
(iii) The operating procedure which focuses on the operating targets and instruments.

3.3.1 The Objectives of Monetary Policy

The objectives set for monetary policy are important because they provide explicit guidance
to policymakers. The monetary policy of a country is in fact a reflection of its economic policy
and therefore, the objectives of monetary policy generally coincide with the overall objectives
of economic policy.
The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in its preamble sets out the objectives of the Bank as `to
regulate the issue of bank notes and the keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary
stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its
advantage'. Fundamentally, the primary objective of monetary policy has been the
maintenance of a judicious balance between price stability and economic growth.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.46      8.46                    BUSINESS ECONOMICS

     Given the development needs of developing countries, the monetary policy of such countries
     also incorporates explicit objectives such as:
     (i) maintenance the economic growth,
     (ii) ensuring an adequate flow of credit to the productive sectors,
     (iii) sustaining - a moderate structure of interest rates to encourage investments, and
     (iv) creation of an efficient market for government securities.

     Considerations of financial and exchange rate stability have assumed greater importance in
     India recently on account of the increasing openness of the economy and the progressive
     economic and financial sector reforms.

     3.3.2 Transmission of Monetary Policy

     The transmission of the monetary policy describes how changes made by the Reserve Bank to
     its monetary policy settings flow through to economic activity and inflation. This process is
     complex and there is a large degree of uncertainty about the timing and size of the impact
     on the economy. In simple terms, the transmission can be summarised in two stages.

     1.  Changes to monetary policy affect interest rates in the economy.

     2.  Changes to interest rates affect economic activity and inflation.

     Although we know that monetary policy does influence output and inflation, we are not
     certain about how exactly it does so, because the effects of such policy are visible often after
     a time lag which is not completely predictable.

     CHANNELS OF MONETARY POLICY TRANSMISSION

     Saving and Investment Channel

     Monetary policy influences economic activity by changing the incentives for saving and
     investment. This channel typically affects consumption, housing investment, and business
     investment.

     ·   Lower interest rates on bank deposits reduce the incentives households must save their

         money. Instead, there is an increased incentive for households to spend their money

         on goods and services.

     ·   Lower interest rates for loans can encourage households to borrow more as they face

         lower repayments. Because of this, lower lending rates support higher demand for

         assets, such as housing.

        © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   1.47                                               MONEY MARKET  8.47

·  Lower lending rates can increase investment spending by businesses (on capital goods

   like new equipment or buildings). This is because the cost of borrowing is lower, and

   because of increased demand for the goods and services they supply. This means that

   returns on these projects are now more likely to be higher than the cost of borrowing,

   helping to justify going ahead with the projects. This will have a more direct effect on

   businesses that borrow to fund their projects with debt rather than those that use the

   business owners' funds.

Cash-flow Channel

·  Monetary policy influences interest rates, which affects the decisions of households

   and businesses by changing the amount of cash they have available to spend on goods

   and services. This is an important channel for those that are liquidity constrained (for

   example, those who have already borrowed up to the maximum that banks will

   provide).

·  A reduction in lending rates reduces interest repayments on debt, increasing the

   amount of cash available for households and businesses to spend on goods and

   services. For example, a reduction in interest rates lowers repayments for households

   with variable-rate mortgages, leaving them with more disposable income.

·  At the same time, a reduction in interest rates reduces the amount of income that

   households and businesses get from deposits, and some may choose to restrict their

   spending.

These two effects work in opposite directions, but a reduction in interest rates can be
expected to increase spending in the Indian economy through this channel (with the
first effect larger than the second)

Asset Prices and Wealth Channel

·  Asset prices and people's wealth influence how much they can borrow and how much

   they spend in the economy. The asset prices and wealth channel typically affects

   consumption and investment.

·  Lower interest rates support asset prices (such as housing and equities) by encouraging

   demand for assets. One reason for this is that the present discounted value of future

   income is higher when interest rates are lower.

·  Higher asset prices also increase the equity (collateral) of an asset that is available for

   banks to lend against. This can make it easier for households and businesses to borrow.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.48     8.48                BUSINESS ECONOMICS

     ·  An increase in asset prices increases people's wealth. This can lead to higher

        consumption and housing investment as households generally spend some share of

        any increase in their wealth.

     Exchange Rate Channel

     The exchange rate can have an important influence on economic activity and inflation. It is
     typically more important for sectors that are export-oriented or exposed to competition from
     imported goods and services.

     ·  If the Reserve Bank lowers the cash rate it means that interest rates in India have fallen

        compared with interest rates in the rest of the world (all else being equal).

     ·  Lower interest rates reduce the returns investors earn from assets in India (relative to

        other countries). Lower returns reduce demand for assets in India (as well as for Indian

        rupees) with investors shifting their funds to foreign assets (and currencies) instead.

     ·  A reduction in interest rates (compared with the rest of the world) results in a lower

        exchange rate, making foreign goods and services more expensive compared with

        those produced in India. This leads to an increase in exports and domestic activity. A

        lower exchange rate also adds to inflation because imports become more expensive in

        Indian rupees.

     3.3.3 Operating Procedures and Instruments

     Quantitative tools ­

     The tools applied by the policy that impact money supply in the entire economy, including
     sectors such as manufacturing, agriculture, automobile, housing, etc.

     Reserve Ratio

     Banks are required to keep aside a set percentage of cash reserves or RBI approved assets.
     Reserve ratio is of two types:

     Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) ­ Banks are required to set aside this portion in cash with the RBI.
     The bank can neither lend it to anyone nor can it earn any interest rate or profit on CRR.

     Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) ­ Banks are required to set aside this portion in liquid assets
     such as gold or RBI approved securities such as government securities. Banks are allowed to
     earn interest on these securities, however it is very low.

     Open Market Operations (OMO)

     In order to control money supply, the RBI buys and sells government securities in the open
     market. These operations conducted by the Central Bank in the open market are referred to
     as Open Market Operations.

        © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.49                                               MONEY MARKET  8.49

When the RBI sells government securities, the liquidity is sucked from the market, and the
exact opposite happens when RBI buys securities. The latter is done to control inflation. The
objective of OMOs are to keep a check on temporary liquidity mismatches in the market,
owing to foreign capital flow.

Qualitative tools

Unlike quantitative tools which have a direct effect on the entire economy's money supply,
qualitative tools are selective tools that have an effect in the money supply of a specific sector
of the economy.

Margin requirements ­ The RBI prescribes a certain margin against collateral, which in turn
impacts the borrowing habit of customers. When the margin requirements are raised by the
RBI, customers will be able to borrow less.

Moral suasion ­ By way of persuasion, the RBI convinces banks to keep money in government
securities, rather than certain sectors.

Selective credit control ­ Controlling credit by not lending to selective industries or
speculative businesses.

Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) -

Policy Rates

Bank rate ­ The interest rate at which RBI lends long term funds to banks is referred to as the
bank rate. However, presently RBI does not entirely control money supply via the bank rate. It
uses Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) ­ repo rate as one of the significant tools to establish
control over money supply.

Bank rate is used to prescribe penalty to the bank if it does not maintain the prescribed SLR
or CRR.

Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) ­ RBI uses LAF as an instrument to adjust liquidity and
money supply. The following types of LAF are:

Repo rate: Repo rate is the rate at which banks borrow from RBI on a short-term basis against
a repurchase agreement. Under this policy, banks are required to provide government
securities as collateral and later buy them back after a pre-defined time.

Reverse Repo rate: It is the reverse of repo rate, i.e., this is the rate RBI pays to banks in order
to keep additional funds in RBI. It is linked to repo rate in the following way:

Reverse Repo Rate = Repo Rate ­ 1

Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) Rate: MSF Rate is the penal rate at which the Central Bank
lends money to banks, over the rate available under the rep policy. Banks availing MSF Rate
can use a maximum of 1% of SLR securities.

MSF Rate = Repo Rate + 1MSF Rate = Repo Rate + 1

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.50     8.50              BUSINESS ECONOMICS

        3.4 THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE FOR
                 MONETARY POLICY DECISIONS

     We have discussed above the instruments of monetary policy. An understanding of the
     organizational structure for monetary policy decisions is necessary to understand the way
     monetary policy is conducted in India.

     The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934 was amended on June 27, 2016, for giving a statutory
     backing to the Monetary Policy Framework Agreement (MPFA) and for setting up a Monetary
     Policy Committee (MPC). The Monetary Policy Framework Agreement is an agreement reached
     between the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on the maximum
     tolerable inflation rate that the RBI should target to achieve price stability. The amended RBI
     Act (2016) provides for a statutory basis for the implementation of the `flexible inflation
     targeting framework'.

     Announcement of an official target range for inflation is known as inflation targeting. The
     Expert Committee under Urijit Patel to revise the monetary policy framework, in its report in
     January, 2014 suggested that RBI abandon the `multiple indicator' approach and make
     inflation targeting the primary objective of its monetary policy. The inflation target is to be
     set by the Government of India, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, once in every five years.
     Accordingly,

     ·  The Central Government has notified 4 per cent Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation

        as the target for the period from August 5, 2016 to March 31, 2021 with the upper

        tolerance limit of 6 per cent and the lower tolerance limit of 2 per cent.

     ·  The RBI is mandated to publish a Monetary Policy Report every six months, explaining

        the sources of inflation and the forecasts of inflation for the coming period of six to

        eighteen months.

     ·  The following factors are notified by the central government as constituting a failure

        to achieve the inflation target:

        (a) The average inflation is more than the upper tolerance level of the inflation target
                 for any three consecutive quarters; or

        (b) The average inflation is less than the lower tolerance level for any three
                 consecutive quarters.

     The choice of CPI was made because it closely reflects cost of living and has larger influence
     on inflation expectations compared to other anchors. With this step, India is following
     countries such as the New Zealand, the USA, the UK, European Union, and Brazil. In recent
     times many countries are moving away from this approach and are targeting nominal GDP
     growth.

        © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.51                                               MONEY MARKET  8.51

    3.5 CONCLUSION

The theoretical exposition of monetary policy might appear uncomplicated. However, the
choice of a monetary policy action is rather complicated in view of the surrounding
uncertainties and the need for exercising complex judgment to balance growth and inflation
concerns. Additional complexities arise in the case of an emerging market like India. There
are many challenges which need to be addressed, such as rudimentary and non-competitive
financial systems, lack of integrated money and interbank markets, external uncertainties and
issues related to operational autonomy of the central bank. Explicit inflation targeting requires
a good degree of operational autonomy for the central bank and a system in which there is a
good coordination between fiscal and monetary authorities.

SUMMARY

 Monetary policy refers to the use of monetary policy instruments which are at the
       disposal of the central bank to regulate the availability, cost and use of money and credit
       so as to promote economic growth, price stability, optimum levels of output and
       employment, balance of payments equilibrium, stable currency or any other goal of
       government's economic policy.

 The monetary policy framework which has three basic components, viz. the objectives
       of monetary policy, the analytics of monetary policy which focus on the transmission
       mechanism, and the operating procedure which focuses on the operating targets and
       instruments.

 Though multiple objectives are pursued, the most commonly pursued objectives of
       monetary policy of the central banks across the world has become maintenance of price
       stability (or controlling inflation) and achievement of economic growth.

 The process or channels through which the evolution of monetary aggregates affects
       the level of production and price level is known as `monetary transmission mechanism'
       i.e how they impact real variables such as aggregate output and employment.

 There are mainly four different mechanisms, namely, the interest rate channel, the
       exchange rate channel, the quantum channel, and the asset price channel.

 A contractionary monetary policy-induced increase in interest rates increases the cost
       of capital and the real cost of borrowing for firms and households who respond by cut
       back on their investment and consumption respectively.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.52  8.52  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

      The exchange rate channel works through expenditure switching between domestic and
            foreign goods on account of appreciation / depreciation of the domestic currency with
            its impact on net exports and consequently on domestic output and employment.

      Two distinct credit channels- the bank lending channel and the balance sheet channel-
            operate by altering access of firm and household to bank credit and by the effect of
            monetary policy on the firm's balance sheet respectively.

      Asset prices generate important wealth effects that impact, through spending, output
            and employment.

      The operating framework of monetary policy relates to all aspects of implementation
            namely, choosing the operating target, choosing the intermediate target, and choosing
            the policy instruments.

      The day-to-day implementation of monetary policy by central banks through various
            instruments is referred to as `operating procedures'.

      Monetary policy instruments are the various tools that a central bank can use to
            influence money market and credit conditions and pursue its monetary policy objectives.
            There are direct instruments and indirect instruments.

      The Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) refers to the fraction of the total net demand and time
            liabilities (NDTL) of a scheduled commercial bank in India which it should maintain as
            cash deposit with the Reserve Bank irrespective of its size or financial position.

      The Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) is what the scheduled commercial banks in India are
            required to maintain as a stipulated percentage of their total Demand and Time
            Liabilities (DTL) / Net DTL (NDTL) in Cash, Gold or approved investments in securities.

      On the basis of the recommendations of Narsimham Committee on banking sector
            reforms the RBI introduced Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) under which RBI provides
            financial accommodation to the commercial banks through repos/reverse repos.

      Repurchase Options or in short Repo, is defined as `an instrument for borrowing
            funds by selling securities with an agreement to repurchase the securities on a mutually
            agreed future date at an agreed price which includes interest for the funds borrowed'.

      In India, the fixed repo rate quoted for sovereign securities in the overnight segment of
            Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) is considered as the `policy rate'.

      Repo or repurchase option is a collaterised lending because banks borrow money from
            Reserve bank of India to fulfil their short term monetary requirements by selling

     © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.53                                               MONEY MARKET  8.53

       securities to RBI with an explicit agreement to repurchase the same at predetermined
       date and at a fixed rate. The rate charged by RBI for this transaction is called the `repo
       rate'.

 Reverse Repo is defined as an instrument for lending funds by purchasing
       securities with an agreement to resell the securities on a mutually agreed future date at
       an agreed price which includes interest for the funds lent.

 The Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) refers to the facility under which scheduled
       commercial banks can borrow additional amount of overnight money from the central
       bank over and above what is available to them through the LAF window by dipping into
       their Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) portfolio up to a limit.

 Under the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) the Government of India borrows from
       the RBI (such borrowing being additional to its normal borrowing requirements) and
       issues treasury-bills/dated securities.

 Bank Rate refers to "the standard rate at which the Reserve Bank is prepared to buy or
       re-discount bills of exchange or other commercial paper eligible for purchase under the
       Act.

 OMOs is a general term used for market operations conducted by the Reserve Bank of
       India by way of sale/ purchase of Government securities to/ from the market with an
       objective to adjust the rupee liquidity conditions in the market on a regular basis.

 The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) consisting of six members shall determine the
       policy rate to achieve the inflation target through debate and majority vote by a panel
       of experts.

 The Monetary Policy Framework Agreement is an agreement reached between the
       Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to keep the Consumer Price
       Index CPI) inflation rate between 2 to 6 per cent.

 Choice of a monetary policy action is rather complex in view of the surrounding
       uncertainties and the need for exercising trade-offs between growth and inflation
       concerns. Additional complexities arise in the case of an emerging market like India
       where inflation is influenced by factors such as international petroleum prices and food
       prices.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.54  8.54  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

     TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

     Multiple Choice Type Questions

     1. Which of the following is the function of monetary policy?
              (a) regulate the exchange rate and keep it stable
              (b) regulate the movement of credit to the corporate sector
              (c) regulate the level of production and prices
              (d) regulate the availability, cost and use of money and credit

     2. The main objective of monetary policy in India is _______:
              (a) reduce food shortages to achieve stability
              (b) economic growth with price stability
              (c) overall monetary stability in the banking system
              (d) reduction of poverty and unemployment

     3. The monetary transmission mechanism refers to
              (a) how money gets circulated in different sectors of the economy post monetary
                        policy
              (b) the ratio of nominal interest and real interest rates consequent on a monetary
                        policy
              (c) the process or channels through which the evolution of monetary aggregates
                        affects the level of product and prices
              (d) none of the above

     4. A contractionary monetary policy-induced increase in interest rates
              (a) increases the cost of capital and the real cost of borrowing for firms
              (b) increases the cost of capital and the real cost of borrowing for firms and
                        households
              (c) decreases the cost of capital and the real cost of borrowing for firms
              (d) has no interest rate effect on firms and households

     © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.55                                               MONEY MARKET  8.55

5. During deflation
         (a) the RBI reduces the CRR in order to enable the banks to expand credit and
                   increase the supply of money available in the economy
         (b) the RBI increases the CRR in order to enable the banks to expand credit and
                   increase the supply of money available in the economy
         (c) the RBI reduces the CRR in order to enable the banks to contract credit and
                   increase the supply of money available in the economy
         (d) the RBI reduces the CRR but increase SLR in order to enable the banks to contract
                   credit and increase the supply of money available in the economy

6. Which of the following statements is correct?
         (a) The governor of the RBI in consultation with the Ministry of Finance decides the
                   policy rate and implements the same
         (b) While CRR has to be maintained by banks as cash with the RBI, the SLR requires
                   holding of approved assets by the bank itself
         (c) When repo rates increase, it means that banks can now borrow money through
                   open market operations (OMO)
         (d) None of the above

7. RBI provides financial accommodation to the commercial banks through repos/reverse
         repos under
         (a) Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS)
         (b) The Marginal Standing Facility (MSF)
         (c) Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF).
         (d) Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)

8. ______________is a money market instrument, which enables collateralised short term
         borrowing and lending through sale/purchase operations in debt instruments.
         (a) OMO
         (b) CRR
         (c) SLR
         (d) Repo

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
.56      8.56           BUSINESS ECONOMICS

     9. In India, the term `Policy rate' refers to

     (a) The bank rate prescribed by the RBI in its half yearly monetary policy statement

     (b) The CRR and SLR prescribed by RBI in its monetary policy statement

     (c) the fixed repo rate quoted for sovereign securities in the overnight segment of
              Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF)

     (d) the fixed repo rate quoted for sovereign securities in the overnight segment of
              Marginal Standing Facility (MSF)

     10. Reverse repo operation takes place when

     (a) RBI borrows money from banks by giving them securities

     (b) banks borrow money from RBI by giving them securities

     (c) banks borrow money in the overnight segment of the money market

     (d) RBI borrows money from the central government

     11. The Monetary Policy Framework Agreement is on

     (a) the maximum repo rate that RBI can charge from government

     (b) the maximum tolerable inflation rate that RBI should target to achieve price
              stability.

     (c) the maximum repo rate that RBI can charge from the commercial banks

     (d) the maximum reverse repo rate that RBI can charge from the commercial banks

     12. An open market operation is an instrument of monetary policy which involves buying or
              selling of ________from or to the public and banks

     (a) bonds and bills of exchange

     (b) debentures and shares

     (c) government securities

     (d) none of these

     13. Which statement (s) is (are) true about Monetary Policy Committee?

     I.  The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934 was amended on June 27, 2016, for

         giving a statutory backing to the Monetary Policy Framework Agreement and for

         setting up a Monetary Policy Committee

     © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    1.57                                           MONEY MARKET           8.57

    II. The Monetary Policy Committee shall determine the policy rate through debate
             and majority vote by a panel of experts required to achieve the inflation target.

    III. The Monetary Policy Committee shall determine the policy rate through
             consensus from the governor of RBI

    IV. The Monetary Policy Committee shall determine the policy rate through debate
             and majority vote by a panel of bankers chosen for eth purpose

    (a) I only
    (b) I and II only
    (c) III and IV
    (d) III only

ANSWERS

1.  (d)   2   (b)  3                               (c)  4.       (b)  5.  (a)   6.  (b)

7.  (c)   8.  (d)  9.                              (c) 10. (a) 11. (b) 12. (c)

13. (b)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
