a  9.70       BUSINESS ECONOMICS

   UNIT - 5: INTERNATIONAL
      CAPITAL MOVEMENTS

                                         LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Unit, you will be able to ­
 Describe the nature and types of foreign capital
 Distinguish between foreign direct investment and foreign

       institutional investment
 Outline the factors influencing foreign investments
 Elucidate the potential costs and benefits of foreign direct

       investment
 Explain the state-of-affairs of foreign direct investment in India

UNIT OVERVIEW

         International Trade

         International Capital Movements

         FDI                                       FPI

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTERNATIONAL TRADE                                9.71  a

    5.1 INTRODUCTION

In unit one, our focus was on international trade in goods and services. Lately, we have
observed enormous increase in international movement of capital. This phenomenon has
received a great deal of attention not only from economists and policy-makers, but also from
people in different walks of life- including workers' organisations and members of the civil
society. In this unit, we shall look into international capital movements; more precisely, why
do capital move across national boundaries and what are the consequences of such capital
movements. We shall also briefly touch upon the FDI situation in India.

    5.2 TYPES OF FOREIGN CAPITAL

The term 'foreign capital' is a comprehensive one and includes any inflow of capital into the
home country from abroad and therefore, we need to be clear about the distinction between
movement of capital and foreign investment. Foreign capital may flow into an economy in
different ways. Some of the important components of foreign capital flows are:
1. Foreign aid or assistance which may be:

       (a) Bilateral or direct inter government grants.
       (b) Multilateral aid from many governments who pool funds with international

               organizations like the World Bank.
       (c) Tied aid with strict mandates regarding the use of money or untied aid where there

               are no such stipulations
       (d) Foreign grants which are voluntary transfer of resources by governments,

               institutions, agencies or organizations.
2. Borrowings which may take different forms such as:

       (a) Direct inter government loans
       (b) Loans from international institutions (e.g. world bank, IMF, ADB)
       (c) Soft loans for e.g. from affiliates of World Bank such as IDA
       (d) External commercial borrowing, and
       (e) Trade credit facilities
3. Deposits from non-resident Indians (NRI)
4. Investments in the form of :
       (i) Foreign portfolio investment (FPI) in bonds, stocks and securities, and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.72  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

       (ii) Foreign direct investment (FDI) in industrial, commercial and similar other
               enterprises

A detailed discussion about all types of capital movements is beyond the scope of this unit
and therefore, we shall concentrate only on foreign investments.

    5.3 FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI)

Foreign direct investment (FDI), according to IMF manual on 'Balance of payments' is "all
investments involving a long-term relationship and reflecting a lasting interest and control of a
resident entity in one economy in an enterprise resident in an economy other than that of the
direct investor". This typically occurs through acquisition of more than 10 percent of the shares
of the target asset. Direct investment comprises not only the initial transaction establishing
the relationship between the investor and the enterprise, but also all subsequent transactions
between them and among affiliated enterprises, both incorporated and unincorporated.

According to the IMF and OECD definitions, the acquisition of at least ten percent of the
ordinary shares or voting power in a public or private enterprise by non-resident investors
makes it eligible to be categorized as foreign direct investment (FDI). India also follows the
same pattern of classification. FDI has three components, viz., equity capital, reinvested
earnings and other direct capital in the form of intra-company loans between direct investors
(parent enterprises) and affiliate enterprises.

Foreign direct investors may be individuals, incorporated or unincorporated private or public
enterprises, associated groups of individuals or enterprises, governments or government
agencies, estates, trusts, or other organizations or any combination of the above-mentioned
entities. The main forms of direct investments are: the opening of overseas companies,
including the establishment of subsidiaries or branches, creation of joint ventures on a
contract basis, joint development of natural resources and purchase or annexation of
companies in the country receiving foreign capital.

Direct investments are real investments in factories, assets, land, inventories etc. and involve
foreign ownership of production facilities. The investor retains control over the use of the
invested capital and also seeks the power to exercise control over decision making to the
extent of its equity participation. The lasting interest implies the existence of a long -term
relationship between the direct investor and the enterprise and a significant degree of
influence by the investor on the management of the enterprise.

Based on the nature of foreign investments, FDI may be categorized as horizontal, vertical or
conglomerate.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INTERNATIONAL TRADE                                9.73  a

i)  A horizontal direct investment is said to take place when the investor establishes the

    same type of business operation in a foreign country as it operates in its home country,

    for example, a cell phone service provider based in the United States moving to India

    to provide the same service.

ii) A vertical investment is one under which the investor establishes or acquires a business
         activity in a foreign country which is different from the investor's main business activity
         yet in some way supplements its major activity. For example; an automobile
         manufacturing company may acquire an interest in a foreign company that supplies
         parts or raw materials required for the company.

iii) A conglomerate type of foreign direct investment is one where an investor makes a
         foreign investment in a business that is unrelated to its existing business in its home
         country. This is often in the form of a joint venture with a foreign firm already operating
         in the industry, as the investor has no previous experience.

    Yet another category of investment is `two- way direct foreign investments' which are
    reciprocal investments between countries. These investments occur when some
    industries are more advanced in one nation (for example, the computer industry in the
    United States), while other industries are more efficient in other nations (such as the
    automobile industry in Japan).

    5.4 FOREIGN PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT (FPI)

Foreign portfolio investment is the flow of what economists call `financial capital' rather than
`real capital' and does not involve ownership or control on the part of the investor. Examples
of foreign portfolio investment are the deposit of funds in an Indian or a British bank by an
Italian company, the purchase of a bond (a certificate of indebtedness) of a Swiss company or
the Swiss government by a citizen or company based in France. Unlike FDI, portfolio capital,
in general, moves to investment in financial stocks, bonds and other financial instruments and
is effected largely by individuals and institutions through the mechanism of capital market.
These flows of financial capital have their immediate effects on balance of payments or
exchange rates rather than on production or income generation.

Foreign portfolio investment (FPI) is not concerned with either manufacture of goods or with
provision of services. Such investors also do not have any intention of exercising voting power
or controlling or managing the affairs of the company in whose securities they invest. The sole
intention of a foreign portfolio investor is to earn a remunerative return through investment
in foreign securities and is primarily concerned about the safety of their capital, the likelihood
of appreciation in its value, and the return generated. Logically, portfolio capital moves to a
recipient country which has revealed its potential for higher returns and profitability.

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a          9.74           BUSINESS ECONOMICS

Following international standards, portfolio investments are characterised by lower stake in
companies with their total stake in a firm at below 10 percent. It is also noteworthy that unlike
the FDIs, these investments are typically of short term nature, and therefore, are not intended
to enhance the productive capacity of an economy by the creation of capital assets.

Portfolio investors will evaluate, on a separate basis, the prospects of each independent unit
in which they might invest and may often shift their capital with changes in these prospects.
Therefore, portfolio investments are, to a large extent, expected to be speculative. Once
investor confidence is shaken, such capital has a tendency to speedily shift from one country
to another, occasionally creating financial crisis for the host country.

                                                   Table 4.5.1

         Foreign direct investment (FDI) VS Foreign portfolio investment (FPI)

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)                    Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI)

Investment involves creation of physical Investment is only in financial assets
assets

Has a long term interest and therefore Only short term interest and generally

remain invested for long                           remain invested for short periods

Relatively difficult to withdraw                   Relatively easy to withdraw

Not inclined to be speculative                     Speculative in nature

Often accompanied by technology transfer Not accompanied by technology transfer

Direct impact on employment of labour No direct impact on employment of labour

and wages                                          and wages

Enduring interest in management and No abiding interest in management and

control                                            control

Securities are held with significant degree        Securities are held purely as a financial
of influence by the investor on the                investment and no significant degree of
management of the enterprise                       influence on the management of the
                                                   enterprise

    5.5 REASONS FOR FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

As we know, economic prosperity and the relative abundance of capital are necessary
prerequisites for export of capital to other countries. Many economies and organisations have
accumulation of huge mass of reserve capital seeking profitable use. The primary aim of
economic agents being maximisation of their economic interests, the opportunity to generate
profits available in other countries often entices such entities to make investments in other
countries.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                            INTERNATIONAL TRADE      9.75             a

  The chief motive for shifting of capital between different regions or between different
  industries is the expectation of higher rate of return than what is possible in the home country.
  Investment in a host country may be considered as profitable by foreign firms because of
  some firm-specific knowledge or assets (such as superior management skills or an important
  patent) that enable the foreign firm to gainfully outperform the host country's domestic firms.
  There are many other reasons (as listed below) for international capital movements which
  have found adequate empirical support. Investments move across borders on account of:

  the increasing interdependence of national economies and the consequent trade

  relations and international industrial cooperation established among them

  internationalisation of production and investment of transnational corporations in

  their subsidiaries and affiliates.

  desire to reap economies of large-scale operation arising from technological growth

  lack of feasibility of licensing agreements with foreign producers in view of the rapid

  rate of technological innovations

  necessity to retain direct control of production knowledge or managerial skill (usually

  found in monopolistic or oligopolistic markets) that could easily and profitably be

  utilized by corporations

  desire to procure a promising foreign firm to avoid future competition and the possible

  loss of export markets

  risk diversification so that recessions or downturns may be experienced with reduced

  severity

  shared common language or common boundaries and possible saving in time and

  transport costs because of geographical proximity

  necessity to retain complete control over its trade patents and to ensure consistent

  quality and service or for creating monopolies in a global context

  promoting optimal utilization of physical, human, financial and other resources

  desire to capture large and rapidly growing high potential emerging markets with

  substantially high and growing population

  ease of penetration into the markets of those countries that have established import

  restrictions such as blanket bans, high customs duties or non-tariff barriers which

  make it difficult for the foreign firm to sell in the host-country market by `getting

  behind the tariff wall'.

  lower environmental standards in the host country and the consequent relative savings

  in costs

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  a        9.76         BUSINESS ECONOMICS

  stable political environment and overall favourable investment climate in the host

  country

  higher degree of openness to foreign capital exhibited by the recipient country and

  the prevalence of preferential investment systems such as special economic zones to

  encourage direct foreign investments

  the strategy to obtain control of strategic raw material or resource so as to ensure their

  uninterrupted supply at the lowest possible price; usually a form of vertical integration

  desire to secure access to minerals or raw material deposits located elsewhere and

  earn profits through processing them to finished form (Eg.FDI in petroleum)

  the existence of low relative wages in the host country because of relative labour

  abundance coupled with shortage and high cost of labour in capital exporting

  countries, especially when the production process is labour intensive.

  lower level of economic efficiency in host countries and identifiable gaps in

  development.

  tax differentials and tax policies of the host country which support foreign direct

  investment. However, a low tax burden cannot compensate for a generally fragile and

  unattractive FDI environment.

  inevitability of defensive investments in order to preserve a firm's competitive position.

  high gross domestic product and high per capita income coupled with their high rate

  of growth. There are also other philanthropic objectives such as strengthening of

  socio-economic infrastructure, alleviation of poverty and maintenance of ecological

  balance of the host country, and

  prevalence of high standards of social amenities and possibility of good quality of life

  in the host country.

                                                     Table 4.5.2

           Host Country Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment

  Economic Determinants                              Policy Framework
  Market -seeking FDI:                               Economic, political, and social stability
  Market size and per capita income                  Rules regarding entry and operations
  Market growth                                      Standards of treatment of foreign
  Access to regional and global markets              affiliates
  Country-specific consumer preferences
  Structure of markets

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTERNATIONAL TRADE                                9.77                       a

Resource - or asset-seeking FDI:                   Policies on functioning and structure
Raw materials                                      of markets (e.g., regarding
Low -cost unskilled labor                          competition, mergers)
Availability of skilled labor
Technological, innovative, and other created       International agreements on FDI
assets (e.g., brand names)                         Privatization policy
Physical infrastructure
Efficiency -seeking FDI:                           Trade policies and coherence of FDI
Costs of above physical and human resources        and trade policies
and assets
(including an adjustment for productivity)         Tax policy
Other input costs (e.g., intermediate
products, transport costs)                         Business Facilitation

                                                   Investment promotion (including
                                                   image building and investment-
                                                   generating activities and investment-
                                                   facilitation services)

                                                   Investment incentives

Membership of country in a regional                "Hassle costs" (related to corruption
integration agreement, which could be              and administrative efficiency)
conducive to forming regional corporate
networks                                           Social amenities (e.g., bilingual
                                                   schools, quality of life)

                                                   After-investment services

Source: International economics (7th ed) International Economics, Dennis R. Appleyard; Alfred J. Field;
Steven L. Cobb (P237)

Factors in the host country discouraging inflow of foreign investments are infrastructure lags,
high rates of inflation, balance of payment deficits, poor literacy and low labour skills, rigidity
in the labour market, bureaucracy and corruption, unfavourable tax regime, cumbersome legal
formalities and delays, difficulties in contract enforcement, land acquisition issues, small size
of market and lack of potential for its growth, political instability, absence of well-defined
property rights, exchange rate volatility, poor track-record of investments, prevalence of
non-tariff barriers, stringent regulations, lack of openness, language barriers, high rates of
industrial disputes, lack of security to life and property, lack of facilities for immigration and
employment of foreign technical and administrative personnel, double taxation and lack of a
general spirit of friendliness towards foreign investors.

    5.6 MODES OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI)

Foreign direct investments can be made in a variety of ways, such as:
(i) Opening of a subsidiary or associate company in a foreign country,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.78  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

(ii) Equity injection into an overseas company,
(iii) Acquiring a controlling interest in an existing foreign company,
(iv) Mergers and acquisitions(M&A)
(v) Joint venture with a foreign company.
(vi) Green field investment (establishment of a new overseas affiliate for freshly starting

         production by a parent company).
(vii) Brownfield investments (a form of FDI which makes use of the existing infrastructure

         by merging, acquiring or leasing, instead of developing a completely new one. For
         e.g. in India 100% FDI under automatic route is allowed in Brownfield Airport projects.

    5.7 BENEFITS OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

The benefits from and concerns about FDI are widely discussed and well documented. While
recognizing the fact that there are also benefits and costs to the home country from capital
outflow, in this unit we focus only on host-country effects of FDI with particular attention to
the developing countries. Following are the benefits ascribed to foreign investments:

1. Entry of foreign enterprises usually fosters competition and generates a competitive
         environment in the host country. The domestic enterprises are compelled to compete
         with the foreign enterprises operating in the domestic market. This results in positive
         outcomes in the form of cost-reducing and quality-improving innovations, higher
         efficiency and increasing variety of better products and services at lower prices
         ensuring wider choice and welfare for consumers.

2. International capital allows countries to finance more investment than can be
         supported by domestic savings. The provision of increased capital to work with labour
         and other resources available in the host country can enhance the total output/GDP
         (as well as output per unit of input) flowing from the factors of production.

3. From the perspective of emerging and developing countries, FDI can accelerate growth
         and foster economic development by providing the much needed capital,
         technological know-how, management skills, marketing methods and critical human
         capital skills in the form of managers and technicians. The spill-over effects of the new
         technologies usually spread beyond the foreign corporations. In addition, the new
         technology can clearly enhance the recipient country's production possibilities.

4. Competition for FDI among national governments also has helped to promote political
         and structural reforms important to attract foreign investors, including legal systems
         and macroeconomic policies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTERNATIONAL TRADE                                9.79  a

5. Since FDI involves setting up of production base (in terms of factories, power plants,
         etc.), it generates direct employment in the recipient country. Subsequent FDI as well
         as domestic investments propelled in the downstream and upstream projects that
         come up in multitude of other services, generate multiplier effects on employment and
         income/GDP.

6. FDI not only creates direct employment opportunities but also, through backward and
         forward linkages, generate indirect employment opportunities. This impact is
         particularly important if the recipient country is a developing country with an excess
         supply of labour caused by population pressure.

7. Foreign direct investments also promote relatively higher wages for skilled jobs. More
         indirect employment will be generated to people in the lower-end services sector
         occupations thereby catering to an extent even to the less educated and unskilled
         persons engaged in those units.

8. Foreign corporations provide better access to foreign markets. Unlike portfolio
         investments, FDI generally entails people-to-people relations and is usually considered
         as a promoter of bilateral and international relations. Greater openness to foreign
         capital leads to higher national dependence on international investors, making the cost
         of discords higher.

9. There is also greater possibility for the promotion of ancillary units resulting in job
         creation and skill development for workers.

10. Foreign enterprises possessing marketing information with their global network of
         marketing are in a unique position to utilize these strengths to promote the exports of
         developing countries. If the foreign capital produces goods with export potential, the
         host country is in a position to secure scarce foreign exchange needed to import capital
         equipments or materials to assist the country's development plans or to ease its
         external debt servicing.

11. If the host country is in a position to implement effective tax measures, the foreign
         investment projects also would act as a source of new tax revenue which can be used
         for development projects.

12. It is likely that foreign investments enter into industries in which economies of scale
         can be realized so that consumer prices may be reduced. Domestic firms might not
         always be able to generate the necessary capital to achieve the cost reductions
         associated with large-scale production.

13. Increased competition resulting from the inflow of foreign direct investments
         facilitates weakening of the market power of domestic monopolies resulting in a
         possible increase in output and fall in prices.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.80  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

14. Since FDI has a distinct advantage over the external borrowings, it is considered to
         have a favourable impact on the host country's balance of payment position, and

15. Better work culture and higher productivity standards brought in by foreign firms may
         possibly induce productivity related awareness and may also contribute to overall
         human resources development.

    5.8 POTENTIAL PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH
             FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

In the above section, we have seen that a wide variety of benefits may result from an inflow
of foreign direct investment. These gains do not occur in all cases, nor do they occur in the
same magnitude. Despite the arguments in favour of FDI, many are highly critical of the impact
of foreign capital, especially on developing economies. They argue that foreign entities are
highly focused on profits and have an eye on exploiting the natural resources and are almost
always not genuinely interested in the development needs of host countries. Foreign capital
is perceived by the critics as an instrument of imperialism, perpetrator of dependence and
source of inequality between and within the nations.

Following are the general arguments put forth against the entry of foreign capital:

1) FDIs are likely to concentrate on capital-intensive methods of production and service
         so that they need to hire only relatively few workers. Such technology is inappropriate
         for a labour-abundant country as it does not support generation of jobs which is a
         crucial requirement to address the two fundamental areas of concern for the less
         developed countries namely, poverty and unemployment

2) The inherent tendency of FDI flows to move towards regions or states which are well
         endowed in terms of natural resources and availability of infrastructure has the
         potential to accentuate regional disparity. Foreign capital is also criticized for
         accentuating the already existing income inequalities in the host country.

3) In the context of developing countries, it is usually alleged that the inflow of foreign
         capital may cause the domestic governments to slow down its efforts to generate more
         domestic savings, especially when tax mechanisms are difficult to implement. If th e
         foreign corporations are able to secure incentives in the form of tax holidays or similar
         provisions, the host country loses tax revenues.

4) Often, the foreign firms may partly finance their domestic investments by borrowing
         funds in the host country's capital market. This action can raise interest rates in the
         host country and lead to a decline in domestic investments through `crowding-out'
         effect. Moreover, suppliers of funds in developing economies would prefer foreign

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTERNATIONAL TRADE                                9.81  a

         firms due to perceived lower risks and such shifts of funds may divert capital away
         from investments which are crucial for the development needs of the country.

5) The expected benefits from easing of the balance of payments situation might remain
         unrealised or narrowed down due to the likely instability in the balance of payments
         and the exchange rate. Obviously, FDI brings in more foreign exchange, improves the
         balance of payments and raises the value of the host country's currency in the
         exchange markets. However, when imported inputs need to be obtained or when
         profits are repatriated, a strain is placed on the host country's balance of payments
         and the home currency leading to its depreciation. Such instabilities jeopardize long -
         term economic planning. Foreign corporations also have a tendency to use their usual
         input suppliers which can lead to increased imports. Also, large scale repatriation of
         profits can be stressful on exchange rates and the balance of payments.

6) Jobs that require expertise and entrepreneurial skills for creative decision making may
         generally be retained in the home country and therefore the host country is left with
         routine management jobs that demand only lower levels of skills and ability. The
         argument of possible human resource development and acquisition of new innovative
         skills through FDI may not be realized in reality.

7) High profit orientation of foreign direct investors tend to promote a distorted pattern
         of production and investment such that production could get concentrated on items
         of elite and popular consumption and on non-essential items.

8) Foreign entities are usually accused of being anti-ethical as they frequently resort to
         methods like aggressive advertising and anticompetitive practices which would induce
         market distortions.

9) A large foreign firm with deep pockets may undercut a competitive local industry
         because of various advantages (such as in technology) possessed by it and may even
         drive out domestic firms from the industry resulting in serious problems of
         displacement of labour. The foreign firms may also exercise a high degree of market
         power and exist as monopolists with all the accompanying disadvantages of
         monopoly. The high growth of wages in foreign corporations can influence a similar
         escalation in the domestic corporations which are not able to cover this increase with
         growth of productivity. The result is decreasing competitiveness of domestic
         companies which might prove detrimental to the long-term interests of industrial
         development of the host country.

10) FDI usually involves domestic companies `off ­shoring', or shifting jobs and operations
         abroad in pursuit of lower operating costs and consequent higher profits. This has
         deleterious effects on employment potential of home country.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.82  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

11) The continuance of lower labour or environmental standards in host countries is highly
         appreciated by the profit seeking foreign enterprises. This is of great concern because
         efforts to converge such standards often fail to receive support from interested parties.

12) At times, there is potential national security considerations involved when foreign firms
         function in the territory of the host country, especially when acute hostilities prevail.

13) FDI may have adverse impact on the host country's commodity terms of trade (defined
         as the price of a country's exports divided by the price of its imports). This could occur
         if the investments go into production of export-oriented goods and the country is a
         large country in the sale of its exports. Thus, increased exports drive down the price of
         exports relative to the price of imports.

14) FDI is also held responsible by many for ruthless exploitation of natural resources and
         the possible environmental damage.

15) With substantial FDI in developing countries there is a strong possibility of emergence
         of a dual economy with a developed foreign sector and an underdeveloped domestic
         sector.

16) Perhaps the most disturbing of the various charges levied against foreign direct
         investment is that a large foreign investment sector can exert excessive amount of
         power in a variety of ways so that there is potential loss of control by host country over
         domestic policies and therefore the less developed host country's sovereignty is put
         at risk. Mighty multinational firms are often criticized of corruption issues, unduly
         influencing policy making and evasion of corporate social responsibility.

No general assessment can be made regarding whether the benefits of FDI outweigh the costs.
Each country's situation and each firm's investment must be examined in the light of various
considerations and a judgment about the desirability or otherwise of the investment should
be arrived at.

Many safeguards and performance requirements are put in place by developed and
developing countries to improve the ratio of benefits to costs associated with foreign capital.
A few examples are: domestic content requirements on inputs, reservation of certain key
sectors to domestic firms, requirement of a minimum percent of local employees, ceiling on
repatriation of profits, local sourcing requirements and stipulations for full or partial export
of output to earn foreign exchange.

    5.9 FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT IN INDIA

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), in addition to being a key driver of economic growth, has
been a significant non-debt financial resource for India's economic development. Foreign

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               INTERNATIONAL TRADE                               9.83  a

corporations invest in India to benefit from the country's particular investment privileges such
as tax breaks and comparatively lower salaries. This helps India develop technological know -
how and create jobs as well as other benefits. These investments have been coming into India
because of the government's supportive policy framework, vibrant business climate, rising
global competitiveness and economic influence.

The government has recently made numerous efforts, including easing FDI regulations in
various industries, PSUs, oil refineries, telecom and defence. India's FDI inflows reached record
levels during 2020-21. The total FDI inflows stood at US$ 81,973 million, a 10% increase over
the previous financial year. According to the World Investment Report 2022, India was ranked
eighth among the world's major FDI recipients in 2020, up from ninth in 2019. Information
and technology, telecommunication and automobile were the major receivers of FDI in FY22.
With the help of significant transactions in the technology and health sectors, multinational
companies (MNCs) have pursued strategic collaborations with top domestic business
groupings, fuelling an increase in cross-border M&A of 83% to US$ 27 billion.

   5.10 OVERSEAS DIRECT INVESTMENT BY INDIAN
            COMPANIES

India is primarily a domestic demand-driven economy, with consumption and investments
contributing to 70% of the economic activity. With an improvement in the economic scenario
and the Indian economy recovering from the Covid-19 pandemic shock, India is relatively well
placed than the rest of the world. Despite major headwinds that continue to pose risks in the
short term, the Indian economy has remained strong owing to robust policy measures in place.
This gives Indian businesses an advantage to make investments abroad and broaden their
operational footprint in such nations. New innovations from abroad would be brought to India
with the help of knowledge spillover, and India itself would contribute to the growth of other
nations. In this manner, a mutual benefit is achieved. In this regard, there have been several
overseas investments made by Indian companies. Some of the key overseas investments and
developments that have taken place in the recent past are mentioned as follow s:

According to data released by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), overseas direct
investment stood at US$ 1,922.51 million in September 2022.

The critical investments are as follows:

·  In June 2022, Tata Steel announced plans to invest 7 million pounds (US$ 837.95

   billion) for its Hartlepool Tube Mill in North-East England.

·  Tata Communications invested US$ 690 million in its wholly-owned subsidiary in

   Singapore.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   a        9.84        BUSINESS ECONOMICS

·  Jindal Steel and Power invested US$ 366 million in its wholly owned subsidiary in

   Mauritius

·  Wipro invested US$ 204.96 million in its wholly-owned subsidiary in Cyprus.

·  Jindal Saw invested US$ 64.5 million in its wholly-owned subsidiary in the United Arab

   Emirates.

·  Restaurant Brand Aisa and Lupin Ltd invested US$ 141.34 million and US$ 131.25

   million in their JVs in Indonesia and the US, respectively.

·  Reliance New Energy invested US$ 87.73 million in its wholly owned subsidiary in

   Norway.

·  Mohalla Internet Pvt. Ltd. invested US$ 86 million in its fully owned unit in Mauritius.

·  ONGC Videsh invested US$ 83.31 million in a joint-venture in Russia.

·  ICICI Bank ties up with Santander in Britain in a pact aimed at facilitating the banking

   requirements of corporates operating across both countries.

·  ANI Technologies, the promoter of OLA, invested US$ 675 million in its wholly-owned

   subsidiary in Singapore.

·  Dr Reddy invested US$ 149.99 million in a joint- venture (JV) in the US.

·  A total of US$ 168.9 million was invested by Reliance New Energy in a JV and wholly-

   owned subsidy in Germany and Norway.

·  Gail India, energy PSU invested US$ 70.17 million in a JV and wholly-owned unit in

   Myanmar and the US.

·  ONGC invested US$ 74.15 million during the month in various countries in 5 different

   ventures.

·  In July 2022, Reliance Brands Ltd. signed a distribution agreement with Maison

   Valentino, an Italian luxury fashion house, to open its first boutique in Delhi, followed

   by a flagship store in Mumbai.

·  In July 2022, Reliance Retail Limited entered into a long-term partnership with Gap Inc.

   to bring the iconic American fashion brand, Gap, to India.

·  In July 2022, Tata Steel signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with BHP, a

   leading global resources company, with the intention to jointly study and explore low-

   carbon iron and steelmaking technology.

·  In January 2022, Ola Electric, the ride-hailing company's electric vehicle (EV) subsidiary,

   announced its plans to establish Ola Futurefoundry, a global hub for advanced

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   INTERNATIONAL TRADE                                9.85  a

   engineering and vehicle design in the UK, investing US$ 100 million over the next 5
   years.

·  In January, Essar Group of India announced that it had created a joint venture with

   Progressive Energy of the UK to invest US$ 1.34 billion in a hydrogen manufacturing

   plant at its Essar Stanlow refinery complex.

·  In January, Hindalco Ltd's US subsidiary, Novelis, announced its plans to invest US$

   365 million in a state-of-the-art vehicle recycling facility in North America.

SUMMARY

 Foreign capital may flow into an economy in different ways, such as foreign aid, grants,
         borrowings, deposits from non-resident Indians, investments in the form of foreign
         portfolio investment (FPI) and foreign direct investment (FDI)

 Foreign direct investment is defined as a process whereby the resident of one country
         (i.e. home country) acquires ownership of an asset in another country (i.e. the host
         country) and such movement of capital involves ownership, control as well as
         management of the asset in the host country.

 Direct investments are real investments in factories, assets, land, inventories etc. and
         have three components, viz., equity capital, reinvested earnings and other direct capital
         in the form of intra-company loans. FDI may be categorized as horizontal, vertical or
         conglomerate.

 Foreign portfolio investment is the flow of `financial capital' with stake in a firm at below 10
         percent, and does not involve manufacture of goods or provision of services, ownership
         management or control of the asset on the part of the investor.

 The main reasons for foreign direct investment are profits, higher rate of return,
         possible economies of large-scale in operation, risk diversification, retention of trade
         patents, capture of emerging markets, lower host country environmental and labour
         standards, bypassing of non-tariff and tariff barriers, cost­effective availability of
         needed inputs and tax and investment incentives.

 Foreign direct investment takes place through opening of a subsidiary or associate
         company, equity injection, acquiring a controlling interest, mergers and acquisitions
         (M&A), joint venture and green field investment.

 Benefits of foreign direct investment include positive outcomes of competition such as
         cost- reducing and quality-improving innovations, higher efficiency, huge variety of better
         products and services at lower prices, welfare for consumers, multiplier effects on
         employment, output and income, relatively higher wages, better access to foreign markets,

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.86  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         control of domestic monopolies and improvement of balance of payments position.

 Potential problems of foreign direct investment include use of inappropriate capital-
         intensive methods in a labour-abundant country, increase in regional disparity,
         crowding-out of domestic investments, diversion of capital resulting in distorted
         pattern of production and investment, instability in the balance of payments and
         exchange rate and indiscriminate repatriation of the profits.

 FDIs are also likely to indulge in anti-ethical market distortions, off­shoring or shifting
         of jobs, overexploitation of natural resources causing environmental damage,
         exercising monopoly power, decrease in competitiveness of domestic companies,
         potentially jeopardizing national security and sovereignty, worsening commodity
         terms of trade and causing emergence of a dual economy.

 FDI in India (Inbound FDI), mostly a post reform phenomenon, is a major source of
         non-debt financial resource for economic development. The government has, at
         different stages, liberalized FDI by increasing sectoral caps, bringing in more activities
         under automatic route and easing conditions for foreign investment.

 Overseas direct investments by Indian companies (Outbound FDI), made possible by
         progressive relaxation of capital controls and simplification of procedures, have
         undergone substantial changes in terms of size, geographical spread and sectoral
         composition. Outward Foreign Direct Investment (OFDI) from India stood at US$ 1.86
         billion in the month of June 2016.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Type Questions

1. Which of the following statements is incorrect?

         (a) Direct investments are real investments in factories, assets, land, inventories etc.
                   and involve foreign ownership of production facilities.

         (b) Foreign portfolio investments involve flow of `financial capital'.

         (c) Foreign direct investment (FDI) is not concerned with either manufacture of goods
                   or with provision of services.

         (d) Portfolio capital moves to a recipient country which has revealed its potential for
                   higher returns and profitability.

2. Which of the following is a component of foreign capital?

         (a) Direct inter government loans

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                            INTERNATIONAL TRADE                        9.87  a

   (b) Loans from international institutions (e.g. World Bank, IMF, ADB)

   (c) Soft loans for e.g. from affiliates of World Bank such as IDA

   (d) All the above

3. Which of the following would be an example of foreign direct investment from
         Country X?

   (a) A firm in Country X buys bonds issued by a Chinese computer manufacturer.

   (b) A computer firm in Country X enters into a contract with a Malaysian firm for the
            latter to make and sell to it processors

   (c) Mr. Z a citizen of Country X buys a controlling share in an Italian electronics firm

   (d) None of the above

4  Which of the following types of FDI includes creation of fresh assets and production

   facilities in the host country?

   (a) Brownfield investment

   (b) Merger and acquisition

   (c) Greenfield investment

   (d) Strategic alliances

5. Which is the leading country in respect of inflow of FDI to India?

   (a) Mauritius

   (b) USA

   (c) Japan

   (d) USA

6. An argument in favour of direct foreign investment is that it tends to

   (a) promote rural development

   (b) increase access to modern technology

   (c) protect domestic industries

   (d) keep inflation under control

7. Which of the following is a reason for foreign direct investment?

   (a) secure access to minerals or raw materials

   (b) desire to capture of large and rapidly growing emerging markets

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.88  BUSINESS ECONOMICS

         (c) desire to influence home country industries
         (d) (a) and (b) above
8. A foreign direct investor
         (a) May enter India only through automatic route
         (b) May enter India only through government route
         (c) May enter India only through equity in domestic enterprises
         (d) Any of the above
9. Foreign investments are prohibited in
         (a) Power generation and distribution
         (b) Highways and waterways
         (c) Chit funds and Nidhi company
         (d) Airports and air transport
10. Which of the following statement is false in respect of FPI?
         (a) portfolio capital in general, moves to investment in financial stocks, bonds and

                   other financial instruments
         (b) is effected largely by individuals and institutions through the mechanism of

                   capital market
         (c) is difficult to recover as it involves purely long-term investments and the investors

                   have controlling interest
         (d) investors also do not have any intention of exercising voting power or controlling

                   or managing the affairs of the company.

ANSWERS

   1. (c) 2. (d) 3. (c) 4. (c) 5. (a) 6 (b)

   7. (d) 8. (d) 9. (c) 10. (c)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
