CHAPTER  a  15

BUDGETS & BUDGETARY
CONTROL

                                      LEARNING OUTCOMES

 State the meaning of budget and budgetary control
 Essentials of budget.
 Discuss the objectives and importance of budget and

      budgetary control.
 Describe the process of preparing budgets.
 State the motivation in budget process.
 List the different types of budgets.
 Differentiate between fixed and flexible budget.
 Prepare fixed and flexible budget.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.2                               a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

      Budgets & Budgetary Control     Essentials of Budget  Capacity-wise
                                                            Functions-wise
                                          Objectives of
                                            Budgeting         Period-wise
                                                            Master Budget
                                       Types of Budgets

                                           Zero-based
                                        Budgeting (ZBB)

                                          Performance
                                            Budgeting

                                          Budget Ratio

     1. INTRODUCTION

An organization has its long-term objectives to achieve. The objectives are broken
down into achievable goals and targets. When these goals and targets are
translated into business plans, it is necessary to express the plans into quantifiable
terms to make it achievable. Budget is a commonly used business language that
expresses the business plans in quantifiable terms. When the targets are monitored
and compared with the actual results with the objective to narrow down the
deviations, make participants responsible and implement the preventive and
corrective actions, is known as budgetary control.

Meaning of Budget and Budgeting

Budget: A budget is an instrument of management used as an aid in the planning,
programming and control of business activity. The Chartered Institute of
Management Accountants (CIMA), UK defines budget as "A financial and/or
quantitative statement, prepared and approved prior to a defined period of time
of the policy to be pursued during that period for the purpose of attaining a given
objective. It may include income, expenditure and employment of capital" The
budget is a blue-print of the projected plan of action expressed in quantitative
terms for a specified period of time.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.3  a

Budget and Forecast

There is some similarity between the budget and forecast as both relate to a
defined period of time. A forecast is an assessment of probable future events.
Budget a financial/quantitative plan of a business enterprise to be pursued over a
period of time. Therefore, at the planning stage it is necessary to forecast a
probable course of action for the business. Budget is a commitment or a target
which the management seeks to attain on the basis of the forecasts made. Forecasts
are made regarding sales, production cost and financial requirements of the
business. A forecast denotes some degree of flexibility while a budget denotes a
definite target.

Budgeting: Budgeting is the process of designing, implementing and operating of
budget. The main emphasis in budgeting process is the provision of resources to
support plans which are being implemented. It is a means of coordinating the
combined intelligence of an entire organisation into a plan of action based on past
performance and governed by rational judgment of factors that will influence the
course of business in the future.

     2. ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF BUDGET

The main characteristics of budget are as follows:
1. A budget is concerned for a definite future period.
2. A budget is a written document.
3. A budget is a detailed plan of all the economic activities of a business.
4. All the departments of a business unit should co-operate for the preparation

       of a business budget.
5. Budget is a means to achieve business objectives and it is not an end in itself.
6. Budget needs to be updated, corrected and controlled every time

       circumstances change. Therefore, it is a continuous process.
7. Budget helps in planning, coordination and control.
8. Different types of budgets are prepared by industries according to business

       requirements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.4  a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

9. A budget acts as a business barometer.
10. Budget is usually prepared in the light of past experiences.
11. Budget is a constant endeavour of the Management.

     3. ESSENTIAL STEPS FOR PREPARING BUDGET

Essential steps for preparing a budget are as follows:

1. Organisational structure must be clearly defined and responsibility should be
       assigned to identifiable units within the organisation.

2. Setting of clear objectives and reasonable targets. Objectives should be in
       consonance with the long-term plan of the organisation.

3. Objectives and responsibility should be clearly stated and communicated to
       the management or person responsible.

4. Budgets are prepared for the future periods based on expected course of
       actions.

5. Budgets are updated for the events that were not kept into the mind while
       establishing budgets. Hence, budgets should flexible enough for mid- term
       revision.

6. The entire organisation must be committed to the preparation and
       implementing budgeting.

7. Budgets should be quantifiable and master budget should be broken down
       into various functional budgets.

8. Budgets should be monitored periodically. Variances of the actual outcomes
       should be compared with the actuals and variances analysed and
       responsibility should be fixed.

9. Budgetary performance needs to be linked effectively to the reward system.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                           a  15.5          a

Specification of                                   Setting goals  Preparation of
   Objectives                                       and targets       Budgets

     Taking       Identifying the                                 Monitoring the
preventive and      deviations                                     actual results

   corrective
     actions

4. OBJECTIVES OF BUDGETING

Planning          Direction and Co-                                  Controlling
                       ordination

Planning

Planning is the beginning of any activity. Planning establishes the objectives of the
firm and decides the course of action to achieve it. It is concerned with formulating
short-term and long-term plans to achieve a particular end. Planning is a statement
of what should be done, how it should be done and when it should be done. The
process of preparing budget begins with the establishment of specific targets of
performance and is followed by devising plans to achieve such desired goals. These
targets include both the overall business targets as well as the specific targets for
the individual units within the business. Establishing specific targets for future
operations is part of the planning function of management, while executing actions
to meet the goals is the directing function of management. It may be explained as

· Budget is prepared in synchronisation with the overall objectives of the
       organisation, keeping mission and corporate strategy into account. Individual
       plans at unit level should be in consonance with organisational plan.

· Budget reflects plans. Therefore, planning should precede the preparation of
       budget.

· Budgeted plans are quantified and responsibility is assigned to the persons
       who are responsible for execution of plan.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.6  a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

· Communication of business objectives through budget has helped many a
       company to reduce expenses during business recession.

· Planning not only motivates employees to attain goals but also improves
       overall decision making. During the planning phase of the budget process,
       all viewpoints are considered, options identified, and cost reduction
       opportunities assessed. This process may reveal opportunities or threats that
       were not known prior to the budget planning process.

Directing and Coordinating

· Once the budget plans are in place, these can be used to direct and
       coordinate operations in order to achieve the stated targets.

· A business, however, is much more complex and requires more formal
       direction and coordination.

· The budget offers an important tool to direct and coordinate business
       activities and units to achieve stated targets of performance.

· The budgetary units in an organisation are called responsibility centers. Each
       responsibility center is led by a manager who has the authority over and
       responsibility for the unit's performance.

· Objectives of each responsibility centre and degree of performance expected
       from them are separately communicated.

Controlling

· Control is the process of monitoring, measuring, evaluating and correcting actual
       results to ensure that a firm's goals and plans are achieved. Control is achieved
       through the process of feedback.

· As time passes, the actual performance of an operation can be compared
       against the planned targets. This provides prompt feedback to
       employees about their performance. If necessary, employees can use such
       feedback to fine-tune their activities in the future.

· Feedback received in the form of budget report from the responsibility centre
       is helpful to know the performance of the concerned unit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.7  a

· Any unforeseen changes into the conditions which were prevailing at the time
       of preparing budget are taken into account and budgets are revised to show
       true performance.

· Comparing actual results to the plan helps prevent unplanned expenditures.
       The budget helps employees to regulate their spending priorities.

The main objective of Budgeting is to help in achieving the overall objective
of the organization.

     5. BUDGETARY CONTROL

CIMA has defined the terms `budgetary control' as the establishment of budgets
relating to the responsibilities of executives to the requirements of a policy and the
continuous comparison of actual with budgeted results, either to secure by
individual action, the objective of that policy or to provide a basis for its revision.
It is the system of management control and accounting in which all the
operations are forecasted and planned in advance to the extent possible and
the actual results compared with the forecasted and planned results.

5.1 Budgetary Control Involves

1. Establishment of budgets

2. Continuous comparison of actuals with budgets for achievement of targets.

3. Revision of budgets after considering the changes in the circumstances.

4. Fixation of the responsibility for failure to achieve the budget targets.

5.2 Objectives of Budgetary Control System

1. Portraying with precision the overall aims of the business and determining
       targets of performance for each section or department of the business.

2. Laying down the responsibilities of each of the executives and other
       personnel so that everyone knows what is expected of him and how he will
       be judged. Budgetary control is one of the few ways in which an objective
       assessment of executives or department is possible.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.8  a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

3. Providing a basis for the comparison of actual performance with the
       predetermined targets and investigation of deviation, if any, of actual
       performance and expenses from the budgeted figures. This naturally helps in
       adopting corrective measures.

4. Ensuring optimum use of available resources to maximise profit or
       production, subject to the limiting factors. Since budgets cannot be properly
       drawn up without considering all aspects, usually there is good co-ordination
       when a system of budgetary control operates.

5. Co-ordinating various activities of the business, and centralising control
       and yet enabling management to decentralise responsibility and delegate
       authority in the overall interest of the business.

6. Engendering a spirit of careful forethought, assessment of what is possible
       and an attempt at it. It leads to dynamism without being reckless. Of course,
       much depends on the objectives of the firm and the dynamism r of its
       management.

7. Providing a basis for revision of current and future policies.

8. Drawing up long range plans with a fair measure of accuracy.

9. Providing a yardstick against which actual results can be compared.

5.3 Steps for establishing Budgetary Control

The following steps are necessary for establishing a good budgetary control
system:

1. Determining the objectives to be achieved, over the budget period, and
       the policy or policies that might be adopted for the achievement of these
       objectives.

2. Determining the activities that should be undertaken for the achievement
       of the objectives.

3. Drawing up a plan or a scheme of operation in respect of each class of
       activity, in quantitative as well as monetary terms for the budget period.

4. Laying out a system of comparison of actual performance by each person, or
       department with the relevant budget and determination of causes for the
       variation, if any.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                   a  15.9  a

5. Ensuring that corrective action will be taken where the plan has not been
       achieved and, if that is not possible, for the revision of the plan.

In brief, it is a system to assist management in the allocation of responsibility and
authority, to provide it with aid for making, estimating and planning for the future
and to facilitate the analysis of the variation between estimated and actual per-
formance.

In order to ensure effective functioning of budgetary control, it is necessary that
the firm should develop a proper basis of measurement or standards with which to
evaluate the efficiency of operations, i.e., the firm should have in operation, a
system of standard costing.

The organisation should be so integrated that all lines of authority and
responsibility are properly defined. This is essential since the system of budgetary
control postulates separation of functions and division of responsibilities and thus
requires that the organisation shall be planned in such a manner that everyone,
from the Managing Director down to the Shop Foreman, will have his duties
properly defined.

5.4 Feedback and Feedforward Control

   Budgetary
Control System

Feedback Control                                   Feedforward
                                                      Control

There are two types of budgetary control system based on timing of action:

Feedback Control: The feedback system of budgetary control, the actual results
for the budgeted period are collected and compared with the budgeted figures.
The exercise of variance identification is done after the completion of the budget
period. The variances are reported and based on the report corrective actions are
taken, responsibility is fixed and based on experience, modification in future targets
is implemented. As the name suggests, it is an Ex-post Corrective control system of
budget.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.10 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

This system of budgetary control is common in organistions where Management
Information System (MIS) is not so robust and where data is obtained only after the
finalisation of books of account. Though this type of control system is less
expensive to maintain but has limitations. Organisation has to remain on looser
side in today's age of data warfare.

Feedforward Control: This the opposite of feedback control system of
budgetary control. It is Ex-Ante Preventive control mechanism of budgetary control.
The budgets are set at the inception of the budgeted period and the actual results
are continuously monitored and compared. The targets are kept realistic as far as
possible and the targets are reviewed and reset if necessary.

This budgetary control system requires a robust MIS supported by integrated ERP
system enabling an entity to get data as and when desired basis. This system is very
expensive and beneficial for the organisations where the business environment is
dynamic and information has important role in getting edge in competition and
todays data warfare.

5.5 Budget Committee and Budget Officer

The budget committee is a group of representatives of various functions in an
organisation. As all functions are inter-related and as any change in one's target
will have its impact on that of the other, it is necessary to discuss the targets so
that a mutually agreed programme is finally decided. This is called coordination in
budget-making. It is a powerful force in knitting together various activities of the
business and enforcing real control over operations.

The Chief Executive is ultimately responsible for the budget programme but it will
be better if the large part of the supervisory responsibility is delegated to an official
designated as Budget Officer The budget Officer should have knowledge of the
technical side of the business and should report to the president or CEO of the
business entity.

The responsibility for successfully introducing and implementing Budgetary Control
System rests with the Budget Committee acting through the Budget Officer. The
Budget Committee would be composed of all functional heads and a member from
the Board to preside over and guide the deliberations.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.11  a

The main responsibilities of the Budget Committee/Budget Officer are to:

1. Assist in the preparation of the separate budget for various departments
       by coordinating the work of the accounts department, which is normally
       responsible to compile the budgets--with the relevant functional
       departments like Sales, Production, Plant maintenance etc.;

2. Forward the budget to the individual departments heads who are re-
       sponsible to implement the budget. The Budget Officer should guide them
       in overcoming any practical difficulties, in its working;

3. Prepare the periodical budget reports for circulation to the individuals
       concerned;

4. Follow-up action to be taken on the budget reports;

5. Prepare an overall budget working report for discussion at the Budget
       Committee meetings and to ensure follow-up on the lines of action
       suggested by the Committee;

6. Prepare periodical reports for the Board meeting. Comparing budgeted
       Profit and Loss Account and the Balance Sheet with the actual results attained.

It is necessary that every budget should be thoroughly discussed with the
functional heads before it is finalised.

It is the duty of the Budget Officer to see that the periodical budget reports are
supplied to the recipients at regular intervals so as to enable them to take remedial
action.

The efficiency of the Budget Officer, and through him of the Budget Committee,
will be judged more by the smooth working of the system and the agreement
between the actual figures and the budgeted figures.

Budgets provides basis for giving an incentive for better performance,; It is up to
the Budget Officer to see that attention of the different functional heads is drawn
to the deviations so as to face the challenge in a successful manner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.12 a                COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

5.6 Advantages of Budgetary Control System

Points                                             Description

1. Efficiency                The use of budgetary control system enables the
                             management of a business entity to conduct its
                             business activities in an efficient manner.

2. Control on                It is a powerful instrument used by business
     expenditure             entity for the control of their expenditure. It
                             provides a yardstick for measuring and
                             evaluating the performance of individuals and
                             their departments.

3. Finding deviations        Budget reveals the deviations of the actual from
                             the budgeted figures after making a comparison
                             and communicating the deviation to
                             management.

4. Effective utilisation of  Effective utilisation of various resources like--
     resources               men, material, machinery and money--is made
                             possible, as the production is planned after
                             taking these into account.

5. Revision of plans         Budget helps in the review of current trends and
                             framing of future policies.

6. Implementation of Budget creates suitable conditions for the

Standard          Costing implementation of standard costing system in a

system                       business organisation.

7. Cost Consciousness        Budgetary control system encourages cost
                             consciousness and maximum utilisation of
                             available resources.

8. Credit Rating             Management which has developed a well-ordered
                             budget plans and which operate accordingly,
                             receive greater favour from credit agencies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a            15.13  a

5.7 Limitations of Budgetary Control System

Points                                             Description

1. Based on Estimates    Budgets are based on a series of estimates, which
                         are based on the conditions prevalent or expected
                         at the time budget is established. It requires revision
                         in plan if conditions change.

2. Time factor           Budgets cannot be executed automatically. Some
                         preliminary steps are required to be accomplished
                         before budgets are implemented. It requires proper
                         attention and time of management. Management
                         must not expect too much during the initial
                         development period.

3. Co-operation          Staff co-operation is usually not available during the
    Required             initial budgetary control exercise. In a decentralised
                         organisation, each unit has its own objective and
                         these units enjoy some degree of discretion. In this
                         type of organisation structure, coordination among
                         different units is required. The success of the
                         budgetary control depends upon willing co-
                         operation and teamwork,

4. Expensive             The implementation of budget is somewhat
                         expensive. For successful implementation of the
                         budgetary control, proper organisation structure
                         with responsibility is prerequisite. Budgeting
                         process start from the collection of information to
                         for preparing the budget and performance analysis.
                         It consumes valuable resources (in terms of
                         qualified manpower, equipment, etc.) for this
                         purpose; hence, it is an expensive process.

5. Not a substitute for  Budget is only a managerial tool and must be
    management           intelligently applied for management to get
                         benefited. Budgets are not a substitute for good
                         management.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.14 a            COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

6. Rigid document  Budgets are sometime considered as rigid
                   documents. But in reality, an organisation is
                   exposed to various uncertain internal and external
                   factors. Budget should be flexible enough to
                   incorporate ongoing developments in the internal
                   and external factors affecting the very purpose of
                   the budget.

5.8 Components of Budgetary Control System

The policy of a business for a defined period is represented by the master budget,
the detailed components of which are given in a number of individual budgets
called functional budgets. These functional budgets are broadly grouped under the
following heads:

1. Physical budgets: Those budgets which contain information in quantitative
         terms such as the physical units of sales, production etc. This may include
         quantity of sales, quantity of production, inventories, and manpower
         budgets are physical budgets.

2. Cost budgets: Budgets which provides cost information in respect of
         manufacturing, administration, selling and distribution, etc. for example,
         manufacturing costs, selling costs, administration cost, and research and
         development cost budgets are cost budgets.

3. Profit budgets: A budget which enables the ascertainment of profit. For
         example, sales budget, profit and loss budget, etc.

4. Financial budgets: A budget which facilitates in ascertaining the financial
         position of a concern, for example, cash budgets, capital expenditure
         budget, budgeted balance sheet etc.

     6 BUDGETS AND MOTIVATION

When pursuing some target, the end result of achieving the goal should be
motivating one. Motivation is a factor which works like fuel to get hope lighted and
ignites the aspirations. Therefore, motivation is the driving force which converts the
efforts into results and thus the long-term objectives of the any person whether it
would be an individual or a corporate.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.15  a

The same principle of motivation also applies to a business entity to achieve its
objectives in the course of pursuing its mission. Budget is a planning exercise which
quantifies the desired results into targets. The budget targets are communicated
to the executives at different levels and they are asked to strive to get the targes
achieved. But the whole exercise is not so simple as it seems in script,
implementation it in practicality has bumpy rides. The behavioural aspect of human
being comes into character, and it is not so difficult to guess why an executive put
his/ her best efforts to achieve the communicated targets. There must be
something motivating in achieving the targets, therefore, a budgeting process
should have the following consideration to make it motivating one:

(a) Performance measurement: The budget, at first be communicated to all
       executives so that everybody must be informed the desired performance
       expected from each of them. Secondly, the achievement of targets should
       have consideration in measurement and evaluation of performance an
       executive at individual level and at departmental level. Rewards such as
       promotion, increment, Performance related pay (Pay), bonus may be
       appropriate motivation factors.

(b) Achievable Targets: While setting targets, the practical aspects such as
       availability of resources and realism of figures must be considered. The targes
       should be balance one, it neither be very easy nor too tough, means it should
       be realistic one. An unrealistic target has reverse impact and may be
       demotivate the executives.

(c) Optimum utilisation of resources: A budget targets which is easily
       achievable may underutilise the resources such as potential skills of
       executives. Pressure sometime forcing to explore innovative ways to get
       things done. Thus, to keep motivation alive, a balanced approach should be
       applied for optimum utilisation of resources upto its effort zone, though
       beyond the comfort zone.

(d) Involvement in budgeting process: The budgets which involves the
       executives from all department can capture the requirement of all the users.
       The participative budgeting motivates the executives and give them a sense
       of ownership. Involvement at planning stage of budget can take care of the
       requirements of the executives and force them accept the targets. However,
       involvement at every stage of budgeting process may distort the objective of
       budget and lands nowhere., thus, a balance approach may be followed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.16 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

     7. PREPARATION OF BUDGETS

1. Defining business or organisational objectives: A budget is a plan for the
       achievement of certain organisational objectives. It is therefore desirable that
       these objectives are defined precisely. The organisational objectives should
       be written down; the areas of control demarcated; and items of revenue and
       expenditure to be covered by the budget clearly stated. This will give a clear
       understanding of the plan and its scope to all those who must cooperate to
       make it successful.

2. Identification of the key budget factor: There are usually one or two key
       budget factors (sometimes there may be more than two) which set a limit to
       the total activity. For instance, in India sometimes non-availability of power
       does not allow production to increase in spite of heavy demand. Similarly,
       lack of demand may limit production. Such a factor is known as key factor.
       For proper budgeting, it must be identified and its influence on production
       on sales estimated properly while preparing the budget.

3. Appointment of controller/officer: Formulation of a budget usually
       requires service of a whole time senior executive.; He must be assisted in this
       work by a Budget Committee, consisting of all the heads of departments
       along with the Managing Director as the Chairman. The Budget
       Controller/Officer is responsible for coordinating and development of budget
       programmes and preparing the manual of instruction, known as Budget
       manual.

4. Budget Manual: The budget manual is a booklet specifying the objectives of
       an organisation in relation to its strategy. The budget is made to decide how
       much an organisation would earn and spend and in what manner. In the
       budget, the organisation sets its priorities too.

       CIMA, London, defines budget manual as, "A document which sets out the
       responsibilities of the persons engaged in, the routine of, and the forms and
       records required for, budgetary control."

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.17  a

Effective budgetary planning relies on the provision of adequate information
to the individuals involved in the planning process. Many of these information
needs are contained in the budget manual. A budget manual is a collection
of documents that contains key information for those involved in the
planning process.

Contents of a Budget Manual

Typical budget manual may include the following:

(i) A statement regarding the objectives of the organisation and how they
       can be achieved through budgetary control;

(ii) A statement about the functions and responsibilities of each executive,
       both regarding preparation and execution of budgets;

(iii) Procedures to be followed for obtaining the necessary approval of
       budgets. The authority of granting approval should be stated in explicit
       terms. Whether, one two or more signatures are required on each
       document should be clearly stated;

(iv) A form of organisation chart to show who are responsible for the
       preparation of each functional budget and the way in which the budgets
       are interrelated.

(v) A timetable for the preparation of each budget.

(vi) The manner of scrutiny and the personnel to carry it out;

(vii) Reports, statements, forms and other record to be maintained;

(viii) The accounts classification to be employed. It is necessary that the
       framework within which the costs, revenue and other financial accounts
       are classified must be identical both in the accounts and budget
       department;

(ix) The reporting of the remedial action;

(x) The manner in which budgets, after acceptance and issuance, are to be
       revised or the matter amended these are included in budgets and on
       which action can be taken only with the approval of top management

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.18 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       (xi) This will prevent the formation of a `bottleneck' with the late
               preparation of one budget holding up the preparation of all others.

       (xii) Copies of all forms to be completed by those responsible for preparing
               budgets, with explanations concerning their completion.

       (xiii) A list of the organization's account codes, with full explanations of how
               to use them.

       (xiv) Information concerning key assumptions to be made by managers in
               their budgets, for example the rate of inflation, key exchange rates, etc.

5. Budget period: The period covered by a budget is known as budget period.
       There is no general rule governing the selection of the budget period. In
       practice the Budget Committee determines the length of the budget period
       suitable for the business. Normally, a calendar year or a period co-terminus
       with the financial year is adopted. The budget period for the calendar or
       financial year is then divided into shorter periods; it may be monthly or
       quarterly or for such periods as coincide with period of trading activity of the
       business.

6. Standard of activity or output: For preparing budgets for the future, past
       statistics, though important, cannot be completely relied upon. The past
       usually represents a combination of good and bad factors. Therefore, though
       results of the past should be studied, but these should only be applied when
       there is a likelihood of similar conditions repeating in the future. Also, while
       setting the targets for the future, it must be remembered that in a progressive
       business, the achievement of a year should normally exceed those of earlier
       years. Therefore, what was good in the past is only fair for the current year
       and should work for much better in the future.

In budgeting, fixing the budget of sales, expenses, and of capital expenditure is
important since these budgets determine the extent of development activity. For
budgeting sales, one must consider the trend of economic activity of the country,
recommendations of salesmen, customers and employees, effect of price changes
on sales, the provision for advertisement campaign plan capacity etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                              a  15.19     a

8. DIFFERENT TYPES OF BUDGETS

                                                   BUDGET

Capacity Wise  Function Wise Master Budget                 Period Wise

Fixed Budget   Sales Budget                                      Long-term
               Production Budget                                   Budget
   Flexible    Plant utilisation Budget
   Budget      Direct-material usage Budget                     Short-term
               Direct-material purchase Budget                     Budget

                                                              Current Budget

               Direct-labour (personnel) Budget

               Factory overhead Budget

               Production cost Budget

               Ending inventory Budget

               Cost of gooods-sold Budget

               Selling and distribution cost Budget

               Administration expenses Budget

               Research and development cost Budget

               Capital expenditure Budget

               Cash Budget

8.1 Classification on the basis of Capacity or Flexibility

These types of budgets are prepared on the basis of activity level or utilization of
capacity. These are also known as "Budgets on the basis of flexibility".

(i) Fixed Budget: A budget prepared on the basis of standard or fixed level of
activity is known as fixed budget. It does not change with a change in the level of
activities. According to CIMA, "a fixed budget is a budget designed to remain
unchanged irrespective of the level of activity actually attained". A fixed
budget shows the expected results of a responsibility center for only one activity
level.

Once the budget is prepared, it is not changed, even if the level of activity changes.
Fixed budgeting is used by many service companies and for some administrative

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.20 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

functions of manufacturing companies, such as purchasing, engineering, and
accounting.

Fixed Budget is used as an effective tool of cost control. In case, the level of activity
attained is different from the level of activity for budgeting purposes, the fixed
budget becomes ineffective. Fixed budget is suitable for fixed expenses. It is also
known as a static budget.

Essential conditions:

1. When the nature of business is not seasonal.

2. There is no impact of external factors on the business activities.

3. The demand of the product is certain and stable.

4. Supply orders are received and issued regularly.

5. The market of the product is normally domestic but it can also apply in
       respect of service export, where fairly regular export orders are received

6. There is no need of special labour or material in the production of the
       products.

7. Supply of production inputs is regular.

8. There is a trend of price stability.

Generally, all above conditions are not found in practice. Hence fixed budget is not
suitable in business concerns.

Merits and Demerits of fixed budgets are tabulated below:

Merits                                               Demerits

1. Very simple to understand                       1. It does not suite a dynamic organization
2. Less time consuming                                 and may give misleading results. A poor
                                                       or good performance may remain un-
                                                       noticed.

                                                   2. It is not suitable for long period.

                                                   3. It is also found unsuitable particularly
                                                       when the business conditions are
                                                       changing constantly.

                                                   4. Accurate estimates are not possible.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.21  a

(ii) Flexible Budget: A flexible budget is a budget which, by recognising the
difference in behaviour between fixed and variable costs in relation to fluctuations
in output, turnover, or other variable factors, is designed to change appropriately
with such fluctuations. According to CIMA, "a flexible budget is defined as a
budget which, by recognizing the difference between fixed, semi-variable and
variable costs is designed to change in relation to the level of activity
attained." Unlike static (fixed) budgets, the flexible budgets show the expected
results of a responsibility center for different activity levels.

One can view a flexible budget as a series of static budgets for different levels of
activity. Such budgets are especially useful in estimating and controlling factory
costs and operating expenses. It is more realistic and practicable because it gives
due consideration to behaviour of revenue and cost at different levels of activity.
While preparing a flexible budget, the expenses are classified into three categories
viz.

(i) Fixed,

(ii) Variable, and

(iii) Semi-variable.

Semi-variable expenses are further segregated into fixed and variable expenses.

Flexible budgeting may be resorted to under the following situations:

(i) In the case of new business venture, due to its typical nature, it may be
       difficult to forecast the demand of a product accurately.

(ii) Where the business is dependent upon the fluctuations of nature e.g., a
       person dealing in wool trade may have enough market demand, if
       temperature goes below the freezing point and much less demand if the
       weather is relatively warm.

(iii) In the case of labour-intensive industry where the production of the entity is
       dependent upon the availability of labour.

Suitability for flexible budget:

1. Seasonal fluctuations in sales and/or production, for example in soft drinks
       industry;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         15.22 a       COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

2. a company which keeps on introducing new products or makes changes in
       the design of its products frequently;

3. industries engaged in make-to-order business like ship building;

4. an industry which is influenced by changes in fashion; and
5. general changes in sales.
Merits and Demerits of flexible budgets are tabulated below:

               Merits                                         Demerits

1. With the help of flexible budget, the 1. The formulation of flexible

    sales, costs and profit may be                 budget is possible only when

    calculated easily by the business at           there is proper accounting

    various levels of production capacity.         system maintained, perfect

2. In flexible budget, adjustment is very              knowledge about the factors of
    simple according to change in                      production and various
    business conditions.                               business circumstances is
                                                       available.
3. It also helps in determination of
    production level as it shows                   2. Flexible Budget also requires
    budgeted costs with classification at              the system of standard costing
    various levels of activity along with              in business.

    sales. Hence the management can 3. It is very expensive and labour

    easily select the level of production          oriented.

    which shows the profit

    predetermined by the owners of the

    business.

4. It also shows the quantity of product

    to be produced to earn determined
    profit.

Difference between Fixed and Flexible Budgets:

Sl. No.        Fixed Budget                        Flexible Budget

1.       It does not change with actual It can be re-casted on the basis of

         volume of activity achieved. activity level to be achieved. Thus, it

         Thus, it is known as rigid or is not rigid.

         inflexible budget.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                          a  15.23  a

2.  It operates on one level of It consists of various budgets for

    activity and under one set of different levels of activity.

    conditions. It assumes that

    there will be no change in the

    prevailing conditions, which

    is unrealistic.

3.  Here as all costs like - fixed, Here analysis of variance provides

    variable and semi-variable useful information as each cost is

    are related to only one level analysed according to its behaviour.

    of activity so variance

    analysis does not give useful

    information.

4.  If the budgeted and actual Flexible budgeting at different levels

    activity         levels                        differ of activity facilitates the

    significantly, then the aspects ascertainment of cost, fixation of

    like cost ascertainment and selling price and tendering of

    price fixation do not give a quotations.

    correct picture.

5.  Comparison of actual It provides a meaningful basis of

    performance with budgeted comparison of the actual

    targets will be meaningless performance with the budgeted

    specially when there is a targets.

    difference between the two

    activity levels.

ILLUSTRATION 1

A factory which expects to operate 7,000 hours, i.e., at 70% level of activity, furnishes
details of expenses as under:

    Variable expenses                              `1,260

    Semi-variable expenses                         `1,200

    Fixed expenses                                 `1,800

The semi-variable expenses go up by 10% between 85% and 95% activity and by 20%
above 95% activity. PREPARE a flexible budget for 80, 90 and 100 per cent activities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          15.24 a         COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

SOLUTION

Head of Account           Control basis             70%    80%     90%          100%
Budgeted hours                                     7,000  8,000   9,000        10,000
                                                   (`)    (`)      (`)
Variable expenses         Variable                 1,260  1,440   1,620         (`)
Semi-variable expenses    Semi-variable            1,200  1,200   1,320         1,800
Fixed expenses            Fixed                    1,800  1,800   1,800         1,440
Total expenses                                     4,260  4,440   4,740         1,800
Recovery rate per hour:                                                         5,040
Total expenses/Bud hours
                                                   0.61        0.55 0.53       0.50

Conclusion:

We notice that the recovery rate at 70% activity is ` 0.61 per hour. If in a particular
month the factory works 8,000 hours, it will be incorrect to estimate the allowance
as `4,880 @ `0.61. The correct allowance will be `4,440 as shown in the table. If the
actual expenses are `4,500 for this level of activity, the company has not saved any
money but has over-spent by `60 (`4,500 ­ `4,440).

ILLUSTRATION 2

A department of Company X attains sale of ` 6,00,000 at 80 per cent of its normal
capacity and its expenses are given below:

Administration costs:                                     (`)

Office salaries                                           90,000

General expenses                                          2 per cent of sales

Depreciation                                              7,500

Rates and taxes                                           8,750

Selling costs:

Salaries                                                  8 per cent of sales

Travelling expenses                                       2 per cent of sales

Sales office expenses                                     1 per cent of sales

General expenses                                          1 per cent of sales

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                  a  15.25   a

Distribution costs:

Wages                                                         15,000

Rent                                                          1 per cent of sales

Other expenses                                                4 per cent of sales

PREPARE flexible administration, selling and distribution costs budget, operating at
90 per cent, 100 per cent and 110 per cent of normal capacity.

SOLUTION

          Flexible Budget of Department....of Company `X'

                                                   80% (`) 90% (`) 100%(`) 110%(`)

Sales                                              6,00,000 6,75,000 7,50,000 8,25,000

Administration Costs:                              90,000     90,000        90,000  90,000
Office Salaries (fixed)                            12,000     13,500        15,000  16,500
General expenses (2% of Sales)
Depreciation (fixed)                                7,500      7,500         7,500   7,500
Rent and rates (fixed)                              8,750      8,750         8,750   8,750

(A) Total Adm. Costs                               1,18,250   1,19,750   1,21,250   1,22,750
Selling Costs:
Salaries (8% of sales)                               48,000     54,000     60,000     66,000
Travelling expenses (2% of sales)                    12,000     13,500     15,000     16,500
Sales office (1% of sales)
General expenses (1% of sales)                         6,000      6,750      7,500      8,250
                                                       6,000      6,750      7,500      8,250

(B) Total Selling Costs                            72,000 81,000 90,000 99,000

Distribution Costs:                                15,000     15,000        15,000  15,000
Wages (fixed)                                       6,000      6,750         7,500   8,250
Rent (1% of sales)
Other expenses (4% of sales)                       24,000     27,000        30,000  33,000

(C) Total Distribution Costs                         45,000 48,750 52,500 56,250
Total Costs (A + B + C)                            2,35,250 2,49,500 2,63,750 2,78,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.26 a                  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Note: In the absence of information, it has been assumed that office salaries,
depreciation, rates and taxes and wages remain the same at 110% level of activity
also. However, in practice some of these costs may change if present capacity is
exceeded.

ILLUSTRATION 3

Action Plan Manufacturers normally produce 8,000 units of their product in a month,
in their Machine Shop. For the month of January, they had planned for a production
of 10,000 units. Owing to a sudden cancellation of a contract in the middle of
January, they could only produce 6,000 units in January.

Indirect manufacturing costs are carefully planned and monitored in the Machine
Shop and the Foreman of the shop is paid a 10% of the savings as bonus when in any
month the indirect manufacturing cost incurred is less than the budgeted provision.

The Foreman has put in a claim that he should be paid a bonus of ` 88.50 for the
month of January. The Works Manager wonders how anyone can claim a bonus when
the Company has lost a sizeable contract. The relevant figures are as under:

Indirect manufacturing   Expenses for a            Planned for      Actual in costs
                         normal month                   January              January
Salary of foreman                                              (`)                  (`)
Indirect labour                          (`)                1,000                1,000
Indirect material                     1,000                    900                  600
Repairs and maintenance                                     1,000                   700
Power                                   720                    650                  600
Tools consumed                          800                    875                  740
Rates and taxes                         600                    400                  300
Depreciation                            800                    150                  150
Insurance                               320                    800                  800
                                        150                    100                  100
                                        800                 5,875                4,990
                                        100
                                      5,290

Do you agree with the Works Manager? Is the Foreman entitled to any bonus for the
performance in January? Substantiate your answer with facts and figures. EXPLAIN.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                             a       15.27  a

SOLUTION

               Flexible Budget of "Action Plan Manufacturers"
                              (for the month of January)

     Indirect  Nature       Expenses               Planned   Expenses    Actual      Difference
manufacturing  of cost         for a               expenses    as per   expenses
                                                              flexible
        cost                 normal                           budget
                             month

                            (`)                    (`)       (`)           (`)         (`)

               (1)          (2)                    (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)=(5)­

                                                                                       (4)

Salary of foreman Fixed     1,000                  1,000     1,000         1,000            Nil

Indirect labour Variable         720                    900       540           600         60

(WN 1)

Indirect material Variable       800               1,000          600           700         100

(WN 2)

Repair        and Semi-          600                    650       550           600         50

maintenance    variable

(WN 3)

Power (WN 4) Semi-               800                    875       725           740         15

               variable

Tools consumed Variable          320                    400       240           300         60

(WN 5)

Rates and taxes Fixed            150                    150       150           150         Nil

Depreciation   Fixed             800                    800       800           800         Nil

Insurance      Fixed             100                    100       100           100         Nil

                            5,290                  5,875     4,705         4,990            285

Conclusion: The above statement of flexible budget shows that the concern's
expenses in the month of January have increased by `285 as compared to flexible
budget. Under such circumstances, assuming the expenses are controllable and
based on the financial perspective the Foreman of the company should not be
entitled for any performance bonus for the month of January.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   15.28 a                 COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Working notes:

1. Indirect labour cost per unit ` 720 = ` 0.09          = `540.
                                               8,000

       Indirect labour for 6,000 units = 6,000 × ` 0.09

2. Indirect material cost per unit `800 = `0.10
                                                 8,000

       Indirect material for 6,000 units = 6,000 × `0.10 = `600
3. According to high and low point method of segregating semi-variable cost

       into fixed and variable components, following formulae may be used.

Variable cost of repair and maintenance per unit= Change in expenselevel
                                                                         Change in output level

=  `650 -`600   = ` 0.025

   2, 000

For 8,000 units

Total Variable cost of repair and maintenance            = `200

Fixed repair & maintenance cost                          = `400

Hence at 6,000 units output level, total cost of repair and maintenance should
be

= ` 400 + ` 0.025 × 6,000 units= `400 + ` 150 = ` 550

4. Variable cost of power per unit = `875-`800 = 0.0375
                                                     2,000 units

       For 8,000 units
       Total variable cost of power = `300
       Fixed cost = `500
       Hence, at 6,000 units output level, total cost of power should be
       = `500 + `0.0375 × 6,000 units = `500 + `225 =`725

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.29  a

5. Tools consumed cost for 8,000 units = `320
       Hence, tools consumed cost for 6,000 units = (`320/8,000 units) × 6,000 units
       = `240

8.2 Classification on the basis of Function

A functional budget is one which is related to function of the business as for
example, production budget relating to the manufacturing function. Functional
budgets are prepared for each function and they are subsidiary to the master
budget of the business.
The various types of functional budgets to be prepared will vary according to the
size and nature of the business.
The various commonly used functional budgets are:
(i) Sales Budget
(ii) Production Budget
(iii) Plant Utilisation Budget
(iv) Direct-Material Usage Budget
(v) Direct-Material Purchase Budget
(vi) Direct Labour (Personnel) Budget
(vii) Production or Factory Overhead Budget
(viii) Production Cost Budget
(ix) Ending Inventory Budget
(x) Cost of Goods Sold Budget
(xi) Selling and Distribution Cost budget
(xii) Administration Expenses Budget
(xiii) Research and Development Cost Budget
(xiv) Capital Expenditure Budget
(xv) Cash Budget

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.30 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

The important functional budgets (also known as schedules to Master Budget) and
the master budget are discussed and illustrated below:

(i) Sales Budget:

       · Sales forecast is the commencement of budgeting and hence sales
               budget assumes primary importance. The quantity which can be sold
               may be the principal budget factor in many business undertakings. In
               any case in order to chalk out a realistic budget programme, there must
               be an accurate sales forecast.

       · The sales budget is prepared for each product. This includes:

               1. the quantity of estimated sales and

               2. the expected unit selling price. These data are often reported by
                       regions or by sales representatives.

       · In estimating the quantity of sales for each product, past sales volumes
               are often used as a starting point. These amounts are adjusted
               (increased or decreased) for factors that are expected to affect future
               sales. Such as the factors listed below.

               (i) Backlog of unfulfilled sales orders

               (ii) Planned advertising and promotion

               (iii) Expected industry and general economic conditions

               (iv) Productive capacity

               (v) Projected pricing

               (vi) Findings of market research studies

               (vii) Relative product profitability.

               (viii) Competition.

       · Once an estimate of the sales volume is obtained, the expected sales
               revenue can be determined by multiplying the volume by the
               expected unit sales price. The sales budget represents the total sales
               in physical quantities and values for a future budget period. Sales
               managers are constantly faced with problems like anticipation of
               customer requirements, new product needs, competitor strategies and
               various changes in distribution methods or promotional techniques.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                       a           15.31  a

· The purposes of sales budget are not to attempt to estimate or guess
       what the actual sales will be, but rather to develop a plan with clearly
       defined objectives towards which the operational effort is directed in
       order to attain or exceed the objective. Hence, sales budget is not
       merely a sales forecast. A budget is a planning and control document
       which shows what the management intends to accomplish. Thus, the
       sales budget is active rather than passive document.

· A sales forecast, , is a projection or estimate of the available customer
       demand. A forecast reflects the environmental or competitive situation
       facing the company whereas the sales budget shows how the
       management intends to react to this environmental and competitive
       situation.

· A good budget hinges on aggressive management control rather than
       on passive acceptance of whatever the market appears to offer. If the
       company fails to make this distinction, the budget will remain more a
       figure-work exercise than a working tool of dynamic management
       control.

The sales budget may be prepared under the following classification or
combination of classifications:

1. Products or groups of products.

2. Areas, towns, salesmen and agents.

3. Types of customers as for example: (i) Government, (ii) Export, (iii) Home
       sales, (iv) Retail depots.

4. Period--months, weeks, etc.

The illustrative format of a sales budget is as under:

           Last   Year Budgeted                    Northern    Southern    Central
           Total          Year Total               Region      Region      Region

           Qty. Value Qty. Value                   Qty. Value  Qty. Value  Qty. Value

Product X

1st Qtr.

2nd Qtr.

3rd Qtr.

4th Qtr.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.32 a                  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Product Y
1st Qtr.

 Total

Example of sales budget:
                                        XYZ COMPANY

                  Sales Budget for the year ending March, 20....

Product A                 Units                    Selling price Per unit (`)          Total (`)
Product B                 5,000                                                    75   3,75,000
                         10,000                                                    80   8,00,000
                                                                                       11,75,000

(ii) Production Budget:

Production Budget is a forecast of the production for the budget period of
an organisation. Production budget is prepared in two parts, viz. production
volume budget for the physical units of the products to be manufactured and
the cost of production or manufacturing budget detailing the budgeted cost
under material, labour, and factory overhead in respect of the products.
Production budget shows the production for the budget period based upon:

1. Sales budget,
2. Production capacity of the factory,

3. Planned increase or decrease in finished stocks, and

4. Policy governing outside purchase.

Production budget is normally stated in units of output. Production
should be carefully coordinated with the sales budget to ensure that pro-
duction and sales are kept in balance during the period. The number of units
to be manufactured to meet budgeted sales and inventory needs for
each product is set forth in the production budget.

The production facility available and the sales budget will be compared and
coordinated to determine the production budget. If production facilities are
not sufficient, consideration may be given to such factors as working
overtime, introducing shift working, sub-contracting or purchasing of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                   a       15.33  a

additional plant and machinery. If, however, the production facilities are
surplus, consideration should be given to promote advertising, reduction of
prices to increase the sales, sub-contracting of surplus capacity, etc.

One of the conditions to be considered in all the compilation of production
budget is the level of stock to be maintained.

· The level of stocks will depend upon the following three factors viz.:

1. Seasonal industries in which stocks have to be built up during off season
       to cater to the peak season,

2. A steady and uniform level of production to utilise the plant fully and
       to avoid retrenchment or lay-off of the workers, and

3. To produce in such a way that minimum stocks are maintained at any
       time to avoid locking up of funds in inventory.

· Production budget can, therefore, show:

1. Stabilised production every month, say, the maximum possible
       production or

2. Stabilised minimum quantity of stocks which will reduce inventory
       costs.

3. In the case of stabilised production, the production facility will be fully
       utilized, but the inventory carrying costs will vary according to stocks
       held. In the case of stabilised stocks method, however, the inventory
       carrying will be the lowest, but there may be under-utilisation of
       capacity.

Example of production budget:

                                                   XYZ COMPANY

Production budget in units for the year ending March 31, 20....

                                                                   Products

                                                                   A              B

Budgeted sales                                                  5,000          10,000
Add : Desired closing stock
Total quantity required                                            500         1,000

                                                                5,500          11,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.34 a               COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Less : Opening stock                               1,500  2,000
Units to be produced                               4,000  9,000

(iii) Plant Utilisation Budget:

Plant utilisation budget represents, in terms of working hours, weight or other
convenient units of plant facilities required to carry out the programme laid
down in the production budget.

The main purposes of this budget are:

1. To determine the load on each process, cost or groups of machines for the
       budget period.

2. To indicate the processes or cost centres which are overloaded so that
       corrective action may be taken such as: (i) working overtime (ii) sub-
       contracting (iii) expansion of production facility, etc.

3. To dovetail the sales production budgets where it is not possible to
       increase the capacity of any of the overloaded processes.

4. Where surplus capacity is available in any of the processes, to make
       effort to boost sales to utilise the surplus capacity.

(iv) Direct Material usage Budget:

The steps involved in the compilation of direct materials usage budget are as
under:

1. The quality standards for each item of material have to be specified. In
       this connection, standardisation of size, quality, colour, etc., may be
       considered.

2. Standard requirement of each item of materials required should also be
       set. While setting the standard quality, consideration should be given
       to normal loss in process. The standard allowance for normal loss may
       be given on the basis of past performance, test runs, technical estimates
       etc.

3. Standard prices for each item of materials should be set after giving
       consideration to stock and contracts entered into.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                               a  15.35   a

After setting standards for quality, quantity and prices, the direct materials
cost budget can be prepared by multiplying each item of material required
for the production by the standard price.

Example of direct material usage budget is as under:

                                 XYZ COMPANY
            Direct material usage in units and in amount

                   for the year ending March 31, 20...

                     Direct Materials

Type        of Product Product B Total direct                           Material       Total
material                                                                cost per     cost of
                        A                          (9,000    material    unit (`)  material
                                                   units)       usage              used (`)
                 (4,000                                        (Units)
                 units)

X (12 units per  48,000                            1,08,000  1,56,000      1.50 2,34,000
finished
product)

Y (4 units per   16,000                            18,000    34,000        2.50    85,000

product A & 2

units       per

product B)

                                                                           Total 3,19,000

(v) Direct Material Purchase Budget:

       · The production budget is the starting point for determining the
               estimated quantities of direct materials to be purchased.

       · Multiplying these quantities by the expected unit purchase price
               determines the total cost of direct materials to be purchased.

               Two important considerations that govern purchase budgets are as
               follows:

               (i) Economic order quantity.

               (ii) Re-order point with safety stocks to cover fluctuations in demand.

       · The direct material purchases budget helps management maintain
               inventory levels within reasonable limits. For this purpose, the timing of
               the direct materials purchases should he coordinated between the
               purchasing and production departments.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.36 a             COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

An example of material purchase budget is as under:

                         XYZ Company
           Direct material purchase budget
         for the year ending March 31, 20.....

                                                   Material X  Material Y     Total
                                                                           3,18,000
Desired closing stock (units)                          3,000       500
Units required for production                      1,56,000    34,000
Add:
Total Requirement                                  1,59,000    34,500
Less: Opening stock (units)                            4,000       300
Units to be purchased
Unit price (`)                                     1,55,000    34,200
Purchase cost (`)                                       1.50      2.50

                                                   2,32,500    85,500

(vi) Direct Labour (Personnel) Budget:

· Once sales budget and Production budget are compiled and plant
       utilisation budget is decided detailed amount of the various machine
       operations involved and services required can be calculated. This will
       facilitate preparation of an estimate of different grades of labour
       required.

From this, the standard hours required to be worked can be calculated the
total labour component thus budgeted can be divided into direct and indirect
labour. Standard rates of wages for each grade of labour can be introduced
and then the direct and indirect labour cost budget can be prepared.

Merits/advantages:

1. It defines the direct and indirect labour force required.

2. It enables the personnel department to plan ahead in recruitment and
       training of workers so that labour turnover can be reduced to the
       minimum.

3. It reveals the labour cost to be incurred in the manufacture, to facilitate
       preparation of manufacturing cost budgets and cash budgets for
       financing the wage bill.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                         a  15.37  a

Example of direct-labour cost budget:

                         XYZ COMPANY
                 Direct-labour cost budget
           for the year ending March 31, 20...

           Units to be Direct labour                      Total  Total budget cost (`)
            produced hour, per unit                       hours          @ ` 2 per hour
                                                         28,000                       56,000
Product A  4,000                                   7     90,000                    1,80,000
Product B                                              1,18,000                    2,36,000
           9,000                                   10

(vii) Production or Factory Overhead Budget:

· Production overheads consist of all items such as indirect materials,
       indirect labour and indirect expenses. Indirect expenses. These include
       expenditures on factors such as power, fuel, fringe benefits,
       depreciation etc. The estimated overheads which are necessary for
       production in the factory are called factory overhead costs and included
       in the factory overhead budget.

· Factory overhead budget usually includes the total estimated cost for
       each item of factory overhead.

· The production overhead budget is useful for working out the pre-
       determined overhead recovery rates.

· A business may prepare supporting departmental schedules, in which
       the factory overhead costs are separated into their fixed and variable
       cost elements. Such schedules enable department managers to direct
       their attention to those costs for which they are responsible and to
       evaluate performance of each department.

· A careful study and determination of the behaviour of different types
       of costs will be essential in preparation of overhead budget.

· A few examples are given below to show how the expenses are
       estimated.

1. Fixed expenses are normally policy costs and hence they are
       based on policy matters.

2. For estimating indirect labour, work study is resorted to and a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.38 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

estimate of number of indirect workers required for each level of
direct workers employed is made--for example, one supervisor
for every twenty direct workers.

3. In regard to the estimate of consumption of indirect materials, the
       age and condition of the plant and machinery are taken into
       consideration.

Example of factory overhead budget:

                                 XYZ COMPANY
Factory overhead budget for the year ending March 31, 20....

              (Anticipated activity of 1,18,000 direct labour hours)

Supplies                                                         (`)         (`)
Indirect labour                                             12,000
Cost of fringe benefits                                     30,000      89,000
Power (variable portion)                                    10,000
Maintenance cost (variable portion)                         22,000      29,000
                                                            15,000    1,18,000
    Total variable overheads
Depreciation                                                10,000
Property taxes                                               2,000
Property insurance                                           1,000
Supervision
Power (Fixed portion)                                       12,000
Maintenance (Fixed portion)                                     800

    Total fixed overheads                                    3,200
    Total factory overheads
Factory overhead recovery rate is:

        `1,18, 000
                               = `1 per direct labour hour

1,18,000 labour hours

(viii) Production Cost Budget:

Production Cost Budget is a forecast of the production for the budget period
of an organisation. Production budget is prepared in two parts, viz.
production volume budget for the physical units of the products to be
manufactured and the cost of production or manufacturing budget detailing
the budgeted cost under material, labour, and factory overhead in respect of
the products.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                              a        15.39   a

Production cost budget covers direct material cost, direct labour cost and
manufacturing expenses. After preparing direct material, direct labour and
production overhead cost budget, one can prepare production cost budget.

(ix) Ending Inventory Budget:

This budget shows the cost of closing stock of raw materials and finished
goods, etc. required to be maintained by the business entity. This information
is required to prepare cost-of-goods-sold budget and budgeted financial
statements i.e., budgeted income statement and budgeted balance sheet.

Example of end of the year (or closing) inventory budget:

       XYZ Company end of the year inventory budget March 31, 20....

                  Units        Unit cost                      Amount               Total
                                       (`)                           (`)              (`)

Direct material

X                 3,000                            1.50       4,500

Y                 500                              2.50       1,250                5,750

Finished goods

A                 500                              49.00*     24,500

B                 1,000                            53.00*     53,000         77,500

Total                                                                        83,250

* Unit cost of finished goods have been computed as below:

                  Unit cost                        Product A                 Product B

                  of input                         Units Amount           Units    Amount
                     (`)                                            (`)                   (`)

Material X        1.50                             12 18.00               12.00            18.00

Material Y        2.50                                     4 10.00           2.00          5.00

Direct labour     2.00                                     7 14.00        10.00            20.00

Factory overhead  1.00                                     7  7.00        10.00            10.00

                                                              49.00                        53.00

(x) Cost of Goods Sold Budget:

This budget covers direct material cost, direct labour cost and manufacturing
expenses. This is adjusted by addition of the cost of the opening inventory
and reducing therefrom the cost of closing inventory of finished products.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.40 a                   COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

We present below the cost-of-goods-sold budget on the basis of the data
taken from the various budgets already illustrated:

XYZ Company cost-of-goods-sold budget for the year ending
                                 March 31, 20....

                                                   Amount

                                                                    (`)

Direct materials used                              3,19,000

Direct labour                                      2,36,000

Factory overhead                                   1,18,000

Total manufacturing costs                          6,73,000

Add : Finished goods (opening)                     1,79,500*

                                                   8,52,500

Less : Finished goods (closing)                    77,500*

Total cost of goods sold                           7,75,000

*Assumed figure

In the above budget if adjustments for opening and closing inventory of finished
goods are not shown. The budget will be called production cost budget.

(xi) Selling and Distribution Cost Budget:

Selling and distribution are the essential aspects of the profit earning
function. At the same time, the pre-determination of these costs is very
difficult. Selling & Distribution Cost Budget is a forecast of the cost of selling &
distribution of goods during the budget period. Selling cost is defined as the
cost of seeking to create and stimulate demand and of securing orders.
These costs are, therefore, incurred to maintain and increase the level of sales.
All expenses connected with advertising, sales promotion, sales office,
salesmen, credit collection, market research, after sales service, etc. are
generally grouped together to form part of the responsibility of the sales
manager.

While making a budget, selling costs are divided into fixed and variable. Semi-
variable costs should also be separated into variable and fixed elements.

The problems faced in the preparation of selling cost budgets are:

1. Heavy expenditure on selling and sales promotion may have to be
       incurred when the volume of sales is falling off. This will increase the
       percentage of such costs to total sales, and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.41  a

2. Sometimes intensive sales and promotion efforts are called for in one
       year and the benefit of such efforts accrue in the subsequent years. This
       makes it difficult to establish a proportion of selling cost to sales.

3. In spite of these problems, some relationship between selling cost and
       volume of sales has to be established and it is the duty of the Budget
       Controller to determine the amount of selling costs to be incurred to
       achieve the desired level of sales volume.

Using the past experience as a guide, consideration should be given to the
future trend of sales, possible changes in competition etc., in pre-
determination of selling costs.

· Distribution cost has been defined as the cost of the sequence of
       operations which begins with making the packet of product avail-
       able for dispatch and ends with making the re-conditioned return
       of empty package, if any available for re-use. It includes transport
       cost, storage and warehousing costs, etc.

· Preparation of the advertising cost budget is the responsibility of the
       sales manager or advertisement manager. When preparing the
       advertisement cost budget, consideration should be given to the
       following factors:

       1. The best method of advertisement must be selected; costs will
               vary according to the method selected.

       2. The maximum amount to be spent in a period, say one year, has
               to be decided.

       3. Advertising and sales should be co-ordinated. It means that
               money should be spent on advertisement only when sufficient
               quantities of the product advertised are ready for sale.

       4. An effective control over advertisement expenditure should be
               exercised and the effectiveness of the advertisement should be
               measured.

       5. The choice of the method of advertising a product is based on the
               effectiveness of the money spent on advertisement in increasing or
               maintaining sales. If the output sold increases, the production cost
               will come down because of the economies of large-scale production.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.42 a                   COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

· The amount to be spent on advertisement may be decided on the basis
       of the following factors:

1. A percentage on the total sales value of the budget period or on
       the expected profit may be fixed on the basis of past experience.

2. A sum which is expected to be incurred by the competitors may
       be fixed to be spent during the budget period.

3. A fixed sum per unit of output can be fixed and added to cost.

4. An amount is fixed on the basis of the ability of the company to
       spend on advertising.

5. An advertisement plan is decided upon and the amount to be
       spent is determined.

· Depending upon the nature of the product and the effectiveness of the
       media of the advertising the company prepares a schedule of various
       methods of advertisement, to be used for effective sales promotion. The
       number of advertisements (insertions) are determined and the cost
       calculated as per the rates applicable to each of the media selected.
       This is a sound method.

Example of selling and distribution cost budget:

XYZ Company selling and distribution cost budget
           for the year ending March 31, 20....

                                                   Amount

Direct selling expenses:                                  (`)

Salesmen's salaries                                14,500

Salesmen's commission                                     7,000

Travelling expenses                                19,000

                                                   40,500

Distribution expenses:

Warehouse wages                                           6,000

Warehouse rent, rates, electricity                        4,500

Lorry expenses                                     11,000
                                                   21,500

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.43     a

     Sales office expenses:                                       16,000
      Salaries                                                    12,000
      Rent, rates, electricity
      Depreciation                                                  2,000
      Stationery, postage and telephone                           12,500
      General expenses
                                                                    3,000
     Advertising:                                                 45,500
      Press
      Radio and television                                          4,500
      Shop window displays                                        18,500

      Total                                                         4,000
(xii) Administrative Expenses Budget:                             27,000
                                                                1,34,500

The administrative expenses are mostly policy costs and are, therefore, fixed
in nature. The most practical method to follow in preparing estimate of
these expenses is to follow the past experience with due regard to antic-
ipated changes either in general policy or the volume of business. To
bring such expenses under control, it is necessary to review them frequently
and to determine at regular intervals whether or not these expenses continue
to be adjusted. Examples of such expenses are: board meeting expenses,
expenditure incurred on staff employed in human resources and finance
departments, audit fees, depreciation of office equipment, insurance,
subscriptions, postage, stationery, telephone, telegrams, office supplies, etc.

                  XYZ Company administrative expenses budget        (`)
                           for the year ending March 31, 20...  28,000

Salaries of clerical staff                                       8,000
Executives' salaries                                                600
Audit fee                                                           800
Depreciation on office equipment                                    250
Insurance
Stationery                                                       1,250

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.44 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

     Postage and telegrams                             950
     Telephones                                        850
     Miscellaneous                                  5,300
     Total administrative expenses                 46,000
(xiii) Research and Development Cost Budget:

Research and development expenditure is to be incurred so that the products or
methods of production do not become obsolete. The research and development
budget is the forecast of all such expenses. Research is required in order to
develop and/or improve products and methods. When research results in
definite benefit to the company, development function begins. After
development, formal production can commence on commercial scale and then
production function starts. Since the areas of research and development cannot
be precisely defined, the costs incurred under both the functions are clubbed
together as research and development costs. Research and Development (R &
D) plays a vital role in maintaining the business. For example, automobile
manufacturers, and those who produce drugs, spend considerable sums on R &
D to improve their products.

Research may be either pure research or applied research. Pure research
increases knowledge whereas applied research aims at producing definite
results like improved methods of production, etc.

Research and development expenses should be controlled carefully and
hence a limit on the spending is placed, i.e., the amount to be spent is
carefully determined or allocated.

· The following are the methods of allocation of R & D expenses.

1. A percentage based on total sales value. This method is good if
       sales value is steady from year to year.

2. A percentage based on net profit.

3. A total sum is estimated on the basis of past experience and future
       R & D plans and policies.

4. A sum is fixed on the basis of cash resources available with the
       company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      a  15.45  a

               All factors which affect the importance of R & D are considered. For
               example, factors like demand for existing products, competition,
               economic conditions, etc., are considered carefully and a sum is set
               aside as R& D budget.

(xiv) Capital Expenditure Budget:

       The capital expenditure budget represents the planned outlay on fixed
       assets like land, building, plant and machinery, etc. during the budget period.
       This budget is subject to strict management control because it entails large
       amount of expenditure. The budget is prepared to cover a long period of
       years and it projects the capital costs over the period in which the expenditure
       is to be incurred and the expected earnings.

       The preparation of capital budget is based on the following
       considerations:

       1. Capital Budget is a budget prepared for capital receipts and expenditure
               such as investment on land and building, plant and machinery obtaining
               loans, issue of shares, purchase of assets etc.

       2. Future development plans to increase output by expansion of plant
               facilities.

       3. Replacement requests from the concerned departments.

       4. Factors like sales potential to absorb the increased output, possibility
               of price reductions, increased costs of advertising and sales promotion
               to absorb increased output, etc.

       5. Overhead on production facilities of certain departments as indicated
               by the plant utilisation budget.

       Merits/Advantages of capital budgeting

       1. Capital budget outlines the capital development programme and
               estimated capital expenditure during the budget period.

       2. It enables the company to establish a system of priorities. When there
               is a shortage of funds, capital rationing becomes necessary.

       3. It serves as a tool for controlling expenditure.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.46 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

4. It provides the amount of expenditure to be incorporated in the future
       budget summaries for calculation of estimated return on capital
       employed.

5. This enables the cash budget to be completed. With other cash
       commitments capital expenditure commitment should also be
       considered for the completion of the budget.

6. It facilitates cost reduction programme, particularly when
       modernisation and renovation is covered by this budget.

ILLUSTRATION 4

A single product company estimated its quarter-wise sales for the next year as
under:

Quarter  Sales (Units)
I                 30,000
II                37,500
III               41,250
IV                45,000

The opening stock of finished goods is 6,000 units and the company expects to
maintain the closing stock of finished goods at 12,250 units at the end of the
year. The production pattern in each quarter is based on 80% of the sales of
the current quarter and 20% of the sales of the next quarter. The company
maintains this 20% of sales of next quarter as closing stock of current quarter.

The opening stock of raw materials in the beginning of the year is 10,000 kg.
and the closing stock at the end of the year is required to be maintained at
5,000 kg. Each unit of finished output requires 2 kg. of raw materials.

The company proposes to purchase the entire annual requirement of raw
materials in the first three quarters in the proportion and at the prices given
below:

Quarter  Purchase of raw materials % to total annual  Price per
         requirement in quantity                      kg. (`)
     I
     II                                 30%                 2
    III                                 50%                 3
                                        20%                 4

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                                    a  15.47      a

The value of the opening stock of raw materials in the beginning of the year is
` 20,000. You are required to PREPARE the following for the next year, quarter
wise:

(i) Production budget (in units).

(ii) Raw material consumption budget (in quantity).

(iii) Raw material purchase budget (in quantity and value).

 (iv) Priced stores ledger card of the raw material using First in First out method.
SOLUTION
Working Note:
Calculation of total annual production

Sales in 4 quarters                                                                  (Units)
Add: Closing balance                                                                1,53,750

Less: Opening balance                                                                 12,250
Total number of units to be produced in the next year                               1,66,000

                                                                                      (6,000)
                                                                                    1,60,000

(i) Production Budget (in units)

Quarters                                           I              II        III           IV      Total
                                                            Units      Units         Units       Units
                                                   Units   37,500     41,250        45,000    1,53,750
                                                           30,000     33,000        36,000
Sales                                              30,000
                                                            8,250
Production in current 24,000
quarter                                                    38,250

(80% of the sale of current
quarter)

Production for next 7,500                                             9,000 12,250
quarter

(20% of the sale of next
quarter)

Total production                                   31,500             42,000 48,250 1,60,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.48 a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(ii) Raw material consumption budget in quantity

        Quarters                                   I  II        III         IV    Total

Units to be         31,500 38,250 42,000 48,250 1,60,000
produced in each
quarter: (A)                                       2  2         2           2

Raw material        63,000 76,500 84,000 96,500 3,20,000
consumption p.u.
(kg.): (B)

Total raw material
consumption (Kg.)
: (A × B)

(iii) Raw material purchase budget (in quantity)

Raw material required for production                                              Qty. (kg.)
Add : Closing balance of raw material                                               3,20,000
                                                                                        5,000
Less : Opening balance                                                              3,25,000
Material to be purchased                                                            (10,000)
                                                                                    3,15,000

         Raw material purchase budget (in value)

Quarters % of annual Qty. of material Rate Amount (`)

         requirement                                                     per kg.

                                                                         (`)

(1)      (2)                                          (3)                (4) (5)=(3×4)

I        30                                           94,500             2        1,89,000

                                                   (3,15,000 kg. × 30%)

II       50                                           1,57,500           3        4,72,500

                                                   (3,15,000 kg. × 50%)

III      20                                           63,000             4        2,52,000

                                                   (3,15,000 kg. × 20%)

Total                                                 3,15,000                    9,13,500

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  (iv)                                            Priced Stores Ledger Card

                                                                                         (of the raw material using FIFO method)

                                                                                                                        Quarters

                                                                                      I                             II                      III                            IV

                                                                              Kg. Rate Value       Kg. Rate Value Kg. Rate Value Kg. Rate Value                                        BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL
                                                                                          (`) (`)
                                                                                                                    (`) (`)                 (`) (`)                        (`) (`)
                                                                              10,000 2 20,000
                                                         Opening                                   41,500               2 83,000 1,22,500 3 3,67,500 38,500 3 1,15,500
                                                         balance

                                                                  (A)                                                                                        63,000 4 2,52,000

                                                         Purchases: (B)       94,500     2 1,89,000 1,57,500            3 4,72,500 63,000        4 2,52,000  ­             ­        ­
                                                                              63,000     2 1,26,000 41,500              2 83,000 84,000
                                                         Consumption:                                                                            3 2,52,000 38,500         3 1,15,500
                                                                         (C)

                                                         Balance: (D)         41,500                        35,000      3 1,05,000  38,500                         58,000  4 2,32,000
                                                                                         2 83,000 1,22,500              3 3,67,500  63,000       3 1,15,500 5,000          4 20,000
                                                         (D) = (A) +(B)­                                                                         4 2,52,000
                                                         (C)

                                                                                                                                                                                       a 15.49
                   a       COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
     15.50

ILLUSTRATION 5

A company is engaged in the manufacture of specialised sub-assemblies
required for certain electronic equipment. The company envisages that in the
forthcoming month, December, the sales will be in the ratio of 3 : 4 : 2
respectively of sub-assemblies, ACB, MCB and DP.

The following is the schedule of components required for manufacture:

                                                   Component requirements

Sub-assembly Selling Price                         Base board  IC08          IC12  IC26

ACB                   520                                1      8           4      2
                                                         1      2          10      6
MCB                   500                                1      2                  8
                                                       60      20           4      8
DP                    350                                                  12

Purchase price (`)

The direct labour time and variable overheads required for each of the sub-
assemblies are:

                                                      Labour hours Variable overheads (`)

                                                   Grade A     Grade B

ACB                                                8           16          36

MCB                                                6           12          24

DP                                                 4           8           24

Direct wage rate per hour (`)                      5           4           --

The labourers work 8 hours a day for 25 days a month.

The opening stocks of sub-assemblies and components for December are as
under:

                      Sub-assemblies                                 Components

    ACB                           800                          Base Board          1,600
    MCB                          1,200
    DP                           2,800                         IC08                1,200

                                                               IC12                6,000

                                                               IC26                4,000

Fixed overheads amount to ` 7,57,200 for the month and a monthly profit
target of ` 12 lacs has been set.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                15.51  a

The company is eager for a reduction of closing inventories for the month of
December of sub-assemblies and components by 10% of quantity as compared
to the opening stock. PREPARE the following budgets for the month of
December:

(a) Sales budget in quantity and value.

(b) Production budget in quantity

(c) Component usage budget in quantity.

(d) Component purchase budget in quantity and value.

(e) Manpower budget showing the number of workers and the amount of
       wages payable.

SOLUTION

Working Note:
1. Statement showing contribution:

          Sub- assemblies                          ABC MCB DP Total

                                                   (`)  (`)  (`)    (`)

Selling price per unit (p.u.) : (A)                520 500 350

Marginal Cost per unit.

Components

- Base board                                       60   60   60

- IC08                                             160  40   40

- IC12                                             48 120    48

- IC26                                             16   48   64

Labour

- Grade A                                          40   30   20

- Grade B                                          64   48   32

Variable production overhead                       36   24   24

Total marginal cost per unit. : (B) 424 370 288

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a    COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.52

Contribution per unit. : (C) = (A) ­                           96 130                  62

(B)

Sales ratio : (D)                                              3                4      2

Contribution × Sales ratio: [(E) = 288 520 124 932
(C) × (D)]

2. Desired Contribution for the forthcoming month December

                                                                           (`)

Fixed overheads                                                7,57,200

Desired profit                                                 12,00,000

Desired contribution                                           19,57,200

3. Sales mix required i.e. number of batches for the forthcoming month
       December

Sales mix required = Desired contribution/contribution × Sales ratio

= `19,57,200/932 (Refer to Working notes 1 and 2)

= 2,100 batches

Budgets for the month of December
(a) Sales budget in quantity and value

Sub-assemblies                                           ACB         MCB           DP       Total
Sales (Qty.)                                            6,300       8,400       4,200  89,46,000
                                                   (2,100×3)   (2,100×4)   (2,100×2)
Selling price p.u. (`)
Sales value (`)                                           520         500         350
                                                   32,76,000   42,00,000   14,70,000

(b) Production budget in quantity

Sub-assemblies                                                 ACB         MCB              DP
Sales                                                          6,300       8,400           4,200
Add : Closing stock                                             720        1,080           2,520

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                                15.53         a

(Opening stock less 10%)                                     ____     ____                ____
Total quantity required                                     7,020   9,480               6,720
Less : Opening stock                                        (800)   (1,200)             (2,800)
Production                                                  6,220   8,280               3,920

(c) Component usage budget in quantity

Sub-assemblies                                     ACB      MCB     DP                     Total

Production                                         6,220    8,280       3,920                     --

Base board (1 each)                                6,220    8,280       3,920              18,420

Component IC08 (8:2:2) 49,760                               16,560      7,840              74,160

                                                   (6,220 × 8) (8,280 × 2) (3,920 × 2)

Component       IC12 24,880                                 82,800  15,680 1,23,360
(4:10:4)
                                                   (6,220× 4) (8,280 × 10) (3,920 × 4)

Component IC26 (2:6:8) 12,440                               49,680  31,360                 93,480

                                                   (6,220× 2) (8,280 × 6) (3,920 × 8)

(d) Component Purchase budget in quantity and value

Sub-assemblies                                       Base   IC08    IC12 IC26                     Total
                                                   board
Usage in production                                18,420   74,160 1,23,360 93,480
Add: Closing stock                                  1,440
(Opening stock less                                         1,080   5,400 3,600
10%)
                                                   19,860 75,240 1,28,760 97,080
Less: Opening stock
Purchase (Qty.)                                    (1,600) (1,200) (6,000) (4,000)
Purchase price (`)
Purchase value (`)                                 18,260 74,040 1,22,760 93,080

                                                        60  20      12                  8

                     10,95,600 14,80,800 14,73,120 7,44,640 47,94,160

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a    COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.54

(e) Manpower budget showing the number of workers and the amount
       of wages payable

    Sub-           Budgeted                                 Direct labour             Total
                                                                                     14,97,600
assemblies Production                              Grade A            Grade B

                                                   Hours    Total Hours    Total
                                                      p.u.  hours p.u.     hours

ACB                6,220                           8 49,760 16 99,520

MCB                8,280                           6 49,680 12 99,360

DP                 3,920                           4 15,680           8 31,360

(A) Total hours                                             1,15,120       2,30,240

(B) Hours per man per month                                 200                200

(C) Number of workers per month:                            576            1,152

(A/B)

(D) Wage rate per month (`)                                 1,000              800

(E) Wages payable (`) : (C × D)                             5,76,000       9,21,600

(xv) Cash Budget:

Cash Budget is a detailed budget of cash receipts and cash payments
incorporating both revenue and capital items for the budget period. This
budget is usually of two parts giving detailed estimates of (i) cash receipts
and (ii) cash disbursements. Estimates of cash-receipts are prepared on a
monthly basis and depend upon estimated cash-sales, collections from
debtors and anticipated receipts from other sources such as sale of assets,
borrowings, etc. Estimates of cash disbursements are based on estimated
cash purchases, payments to creditors, employees' remuneration, bonus,
advances to suppliers, budgeted capital expenditure for expansion, etc.

Cash budget represents the cash requirements of the business during the
budget period. It is the plan of receipts and payments of cash for the
budget period, analysed to show the monthly flow of cash drawn up in such
a way that the balance can be forecasted at regular intervals.

The cash budget is one of the most important elements of the budgeted
balance sheet. Information from the various operating budgets, such as the
sales budget, the direct materials purchases budget, and the selling and
administrative expenses budget, affects the cash budget.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.55  a

       In addition, the capital expenditures budget, dividend policies, and plans for
       equity or long-term debt financing also affect the cash budget.

       The main objectives of preparing cash budget are:

       (i) The probable cash position, as a result of planned operation, is
               assessed; and thus, the excess or shortage of cash becomes clear. This
               helps in arranging short-term borrowings in advance to meet the
               situations of shortage of cash or making investments when cash is in
               excess.

       (ii) Cash can be coordinated in relation to total working capital, sales
               investment and debt.

       (iii) A sound basis for credit for current control of cash position is
               established.

       (iv) The effect of sudden and seasonal requirements, large stocks, delay in
               collection of receipts, etc., on the cash position of the organization is
               revealed and things become under to the management.

       Advantages of cash budget

       (i) It aids in securing option working capital need for smooth running of
               the operation and planning for payments to the shareholders.

       (ii) It eases strains of a cash shortage

       (iii) It facilitates temporary cash investment wherever, and to whatever
               extent, found in excess

       (iv) It provides for normal growth

8.3 Master Budget

CIMA, London, defines it as "the summary budget, incorporating its component
functional budgets, which is finally approved, adopted and employed." When all
the necessary functional budgets have been prepared, the budget officer will
prepare the master budget which may consist of budgeted profit and loss account
and budgeted balance sheet. These are in fact the budget summaries. When the
master budget is approved by the board of directors, it represents a standard for
the achievement of which all the departments will work. On the basis of the various

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                       a          COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
         15.56

budgets (schedules) prepared earlier in this study, we prepare below budgeted
income statement and budgeted balance sheet.

Example of budgeted income statement:

                 XYZ Company Budgeted Income Statement
                      For the Year Ending March 31, 20....

Sales                                                               (`)        Amount
Less: Cost of goods sold                                                              (`)
Gross margin                                                 1,36,500
Less: Selling and distribution expenses                        46,000         11,75,000
Less: Administrative expenses                                                  7,75,000
Profit before interest and taxes                                               4,00,000
Interest expenses (assumed)
Profit before tax                                                              1,82,500
Income-tax (30% assumed)                                                       2,17,500
Net profit
                                                                                  50,000
                                                                               1,67,500

                                                                                  50,250
                                                                               1,17,250

Example of budgeted balance sheet:

                     XYZ Company Budgeted Balance Sheet
                                      March 31, 20....

                                                   (`)                   (`)  (`)

Share capital                                      3,50,000

Retained income                                    1,29,000                   4,79,000

Represented by:

Plant and machinery                                3,40,000

Less: Provision for depreciation                   60,000                     2,80,000

Raw materials                                      5,750

Finished goods                                     77,500

Debtors                                            1,10,000

Cash                                               37,750    2,31,000

Less: Creditors                                              32,000           1,99,000

                                                                              4,79,000

Note: Information not available in respect of share capital, opening balance of retained
earnings, current assets and current liabilities, etc., has been assumed to complete the above
balance sheet.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL            15.57     a

ILLUSTRATION 6

Float glass Manufacturing Company requires you to PREPARE the Master budget for
the next year from the following information:

Sales:                                                                       ` 6,00,000
       Toughened Glass                                                       ` 2,00,000
       Bent Glass                                                          60% of sales
                                                   20 workers @ ` 150 per month
Direct material cost
Direct wages                                                         ` 500 per month
Factory overheads:                                                   ` 400 per month

       Indirect labour ­                                                  2.5% on sales
       Works manager                                                           ` 12,600
       Foreman                                                                   ` 3,000
Stores and spares                                                                ` 8,000
Depreciation on machinery
Light and power                                                 10% on direct wages
Repairs and maintenance                                             ` 36,000 per year
Others sundries
Administration, selling and distribution
expenses

SOLUTION

          Master Budget for the year ending _____

Sales:                                                               (`)
Toughened Glass                                              6,00,000
Bent Glass                                                   2,00,000
                                                             8,00,000
                         Total Sales

Less: Cost of production:                          4,80,000
       Direct materials (60% of `8,00,000)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a             COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.58

       Direct wages (20 workers × `150 ×                   36,000
12months)

              Prime Cost                                   5,16,000

Fixed Factory Overhead:

Works manager's salary (500 × 12)                  6,000

Foreman's salary (400 × 12)                        4,800

Depreciation                                       12,600

Light and power (assumed fixed)                    3,000 26,400

Variable Factory Overhead:

Stores and spares                                  20,000

Repairs and maintenance                            8,000

Sundry expenses                                    3,600 31,600

Works Cost                                                           5,74,000

Gross Profit (Sales ­ Works cost)                                    2,26,000

Less: Adm., selling and distribution expenses                        36,000

              Net Profit                                             1,90,000

8.4 Classification on the basis of Time Period

These types of Budgets are classified on the basis of time periods. These types of
budgets reflect the planning period of the organization.

Long term Budget: - Long Term Budget is a budget prepared covering a period of
more than a year. The Budgets are prepared to depict long term planning of the
business. The period of long-term Budgets varies between three to ten years.
These budgets are useful for those industries where gestation period is long i.e.,
the business entities manufacturing machinery, electricity etc.

1. Short term Budget: - These budgets are generally for one or two years and
       are in the form of monetary terms. The consumer's good industries like
       Sugar, Cotton, and textile use short term budgets.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.59  a

2. Current Budgets: - The period of current budgets is generally of months and
       weeks. These budgets relate to the current activities of the business.
       According to CIMA London "Current budget is a budget which is created which
       is established for use over a short period of time and is related to current
       conditions".

     9. ZERO ­ BASED BUDGETING (ZBB)

Zero-based Budgeting (ZBB) is defined as a method of budgeting which requires
each cost element to be specifically justified, though the activities to which the
budget relates are not being undertaken for the first time. The cost of each activity
has to be justified and without justification, the budget allowance is zero.

Zero based budgeting differs from the conventional system of budgeting because
it mainly starts from scratch or zero and not on the basis of trends or historical
levels of expenditure. In the customary budgeting system, the last year's figures are
accepted as they are, or cut back or increases are granted. Zero based budgeting
on the other hand, starts with the premise that the budget for next period is zero
so long the demand for a function, process, project or activity is not justified for
each rupee from the first rupee spent.

Zero-based Budgeting (ZBB) is an emergent form of budgeting which arises to
overcome the limitations of incremental (traditional) budgeting system.

ZBB is an activity-based budgeting system where budgets are prepared for
each activity rather than functional department. Justification in the form of cost
benefits for the activity is required to be given. The activities are then evaluated
and prioritized by the management on the basis of factors like synchronisation with
organisational objectives, availability of funds, regulatory requirement etc.

ZBB is suitable for both corporate and non-corporate entities. In case of non-
corporate entities like Government department, local bodies, not for profit
organisations, where these entities need to justify the benefits of expenditures on
social programmes like mid-day meal, installation of street lights, provision of
drinking water etc.

In case of corporate entities, ZBB is best suited for discretionary costs like
research and development cost, training programmes, advertisement etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.60

9.1 Stages in Zero-based Budgeting

ZBB involves the following stages:

(i) Identification and description of Decision packages

(ii) Evaluation of Decision packages

(iii) Ranking (Prioritisation) of the Decision packages

(iv) Allocation of resources

(i) Identification and description of Decision packages: Decision packages
       are the programmes or activities for which decision is required to be taken.
       The programmes or activities are described for technical specifications,
       financial impact in the form of cost benefit analysis and other issues like
       environmental, regulatory, social etc.

(ii) Evaluation of Decision packages: Once Decision packages are identified
       and described, it is evaluated against factors like synchronisation with
       organisational objectives, availability of funds, regulatory requirement etc.

(iii) Ranking (Prioritisation) of the Decision packages: After evaluation of the
       decision packages, it is ranked on the basis priority of the activities. Because
       of this prioritization feature ZBB is also known as Priority-based
       Budgeting.

(iv) Allocation of resources: After ranking of the decision packages, resources
       are allocated for decision packages. Budgets are prepared like it is done first
       time without taking reference to previous budgets.

9.2 Advantages of Zero-based Budgeting

The advantages of zero-based budgeting are as follows:

· It provides a systematic approach for the evaluation of different
       activities and rank them in order of preference for the allocation of scarce
       resources.

· It ensures that the various functions undertaken by the organization are
       critical for the achievement of its objectives and are being performed in the
       best possible way.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.61  a

· It provides an opportunity to the management to allocate resources for
       various activities only after having a thorough cost-benefit-analysis. The
       chances of arbitrary cuts and enhancement are thus avoided.

· The areas of wasteful expenditure can be easily identified and
       eliminated.

· Departmental budgets are closely linked with corporation objectives.

· The technique can also be used for the introduction and implementation
       of the system of `management by objective.' Thus, it cannot only be used
       for fulfillment of the objectives of traditional budgeting but it can also be
       used for a variety of other purposes.

Zero-based budgeting is superior to traditional budgeting: Zero based
budgeting is superior to traditional budgeting in the following manner:

· It provides a systematic approach for evaluation of different activities.

· It ensures that the function undertaken are critical for the achievement of the
       objectives.

· It provides an opportunity for management to allocate resources to various
       activities after a thorough ­ cost benefit analysis.

· It helps in the identification of wasteful expenditure and then their
       elimination. If facilitates the close linkage of departmental budgets with
       corporate objectives

· It helps in the introduction of a system of Management by Objectives.

9.3 Difference between Traditional Budgeting and Zero-
      based budgeting

Following are the points of difference between traditional budgeting and zero-
based budgeting:

· Traditional budgeting is accounting oriented. Main stress happens to be on
       previous level of expenditure. Zero-based budgeting makes a decision-
       oriented approach. It is very rational in nature and requires all programmes,
       old and new, to compete for scarce resources.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.62

· In traditional budgeting, first reference is made to past level of spending and
       then demand for inflation and new programmes. In zero- based budgeting,
       management focuses attention to only on decision packages, which enjoy
       priority to others.

· In tradition budgeting, some managers deliberately inflate their budget
       request so that after the cuts they still get what they want. In zero-based
       budgeting, a rationale analysis of budget proposals is attempted. The
       managers, who unnecessarily try to inflate the budget request, are likely to
       be caught and exposed. Management accords its approval only to a carefully
       devised result-oriented package.

· Traditional budgeting is not as clear and as responsive as zero-base
       budgeting.

· In traditional budgeting, it is for top management to decide why a particular
       amount should be spent on a particular decision unit. In Zero-based
       budgeting, this responsibility is shifted from top management to the manager
       of decision unit.

· Traditional budgeting makes a routine approach. Zero-based budgeting
       makes a very straightforward approach and immediately spotlights the
       decision packages enjoying priority over others.

9.4 Limitations of Zero-based Budgeting

· The work involves in the creation of decision-making and their subsequent
       ranking has to be made on the basis of new data. This process is very tedious
       to management.

· The activities selected for the purpose of ZBB are on the basis of the
       traditional functional departments. So, the consideration scheme may not be
       implemented properly.

     10. PERFORMANCE BUDGETING (PB)

Performance budgeting (PB) involves evaluation of the performance of an
organisation in the context of both specific as well as overall objectives of the
organisation. This requires complete clarity about both the short-term as well as

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.63  a

long-term organisational objectives. The responsibility of the various levels of
management should be predetermined in terms of results expected from them and
the authority vested in them. In other words, performance budgeting requires fixing
of the responsibility of each executive in organisation and the continuous appraisal
of his performance. It is, therefore, considered to be synonymous with
responsibility accounting.

Performance Budgeting provide a meaningful relationship between estimated
inputs and expected outputs as an integral part of the budgeting system. A
performance budget is one which presents the purposes and objectives for
which funds are required, the costs of the programmes proposed for achieving
those objectives, and quantitative data measuring the accomplishments and work
performed under each programme. Thus, PB is a technique of presenting budgets
for costs and revenues in terms of functions. Programmes and activities are
correlating the physical and financial aspect of the individual items comprising the
budget.

10.1 Traditional Budgeting vs. Performance Budgeting

· The traditional budgeting gives more emphasis on the financial aspect than
       the physical aspects or performance. PB aims at establishing a relationship
       between the inputs and the outputs.

· Traditional budgets are generally prepared with the main basis towards the
       objects or items of expenditure i.e., it highlights the items of expenditure,
       namely, salaries, stores and materials, rates, rents and taxes and so on. In the
       PB emphasis is more on the functions of the organisation, the programmes
       to discharge this function and the activities which will be involved in
       undertaking these programmes.

10.2 Steps in Performance Budgeting

According to the Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC, the following steps are
the basic ones in PB:

· Establishing a meaningful functional programme and activity classification of
       government operations.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                      a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
        15.64

· Bring the system of accounting and financial management in accordance with
       this classification.

· Evolving suitable norms, yardsticks, work units of performance and units
       costs, wherever possible under each programme and activity for their
       reporting and evaluation.

The Report of the ARC use the following terms in an integrated sequence:

Functions                Programme                 Activity  Project

The team `function' is used in the sense of `objective'. For achieving objectives
`programmes' will have to be evolved. In respect of time horizon, it is essentially a
replacement of traditional annual fiscal budgeting by a more output-oriented, but
still an annual, exercise.

For an enterprise that wants to adopt PB, it is thus imperative that:

· the objectives of the enterprise are spelt out in concrete terms.

· the objectives are then translated into specific functions, programmes,
       activities and tasks for different levels of management within the realities of
       fiscal; constraints;

· realistic and acceptable norms, yardsticks or standards and performance
       indicators should be evolved and expressed in quantifiable physical units.

· a style of management based upon decentralised responsibility structure
       should be adopted, and

· an accounting and reporting system should be developed to facilities
       monitoring, analysis and review of actual performance in relation to budgets.

Performance Reporting at various levels of management:

Report     :             A major part of the management accountant's job

                         consists of preparing reports to provide information

                         for purposes of control and planning.

                         The important consideration in drawing up of
                         reports and determining their scope are the
                         following:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL               15.65  a

Significance    :  Are the facts in the reports reliable? Does it either

                   called for action or demonstrate the effect of action?

                   It is material enough.

Timeliness      :  How late can the information be and still be of use?

                   What is the earliest moment at which it could be used

                   if it were available? How frequently is it required?

Accuracy        :  How small should be an inaccuracy which does not

                   alter the significance of the information?

Appropriateness :  Is the recipient the right person to take any action that
                   is needed? Is there any other information which is
                   required to support the information to anyone else
                   jointly interested?

Discrimination  :  Will anything be lost by omitting the item? Will any of
                   the items gain from the omission? Is the responsibility
                   for suppressing the item acceptable?

Presentation    :  Is the report clear and unbiased? Is the form of it is

                   suitable to the subject? Is the form of it suitable to the

                   recipient?

The following are certain types of reports which are to be prepared and
submitted to management regularly at predetermined time interval:

1. Top Management: (Including Board of Directors and financial managers)

(i) Balance Sheet

(ii) Profit & Loss Statement

(iii) Position of stocks

(iv) Disposition of funds or working capital;

(v) Capital expenditure and forward commitments together with progress
       of projects in hands;

(vi) Cash-flow statements;

(vii) Sales, production, and other appropriate statistics.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.66

2. Sales Management:
       (i) Actual sales compared with budgeted sales to measure performance by:
               - Products,
               - Territories
               - Individual salesmen, and
               - Customers.
       (ii) Standard profit and loss by product:
               - For fixing selling prices, and
               - To Concentrate on sales of most profitable products.
       (iii) Selling expenses in relation to budget and sales value analyzed by:
               - Products,
               - Territories
               - Individual salesmen, and
               - Customers.
       (iv) Bad debts and accounts which are slow and difficult in collection.
       (v) Status reports on new or doubtful customers.

3. Production Management:
       (i) To Buyer: Price variations on purchases analysed by commodities.
       (ii) To Foreman:
               - Operational efficiency for individual operators duly summarized
                       as departmental average;
               - Labour utilization report and causes of lost time and controllable
                       time;
               - Indirect shop expenses against the standard allowed; and
               - Scrap report.
       (iii) To Works Managers:
               - Departmental operating statement;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.67  a

               - General works operating statements (Expenses relating to all works
                       expenses not directly allocable or controllable by departments);

               - Plant utilization report;
               - Department Scrap report; and
               - Material usage report.
4. Special Reports:
       These reports may be prepared at the request of general management or at
       the initiative of the management accountants. The necessity for them may, in
       some cases, arise on account of the need for more detailed information on
       matters of interest first revealed; by the routine, reports. These reports may
       range over a very wide area. Some of the matters in respect of which such
       reports may be required can be:
       (i) Taxation legislation and its effect on profits.
       (ii) Estimates of the earning capacity of a new project.
       (iii) Break-even analysis
       (iv) Replacement of capital equipment.
       (v) Special pricing analysis
       (vi) Make or buy certain components
       (vii) Statement of surplus available for payment of bonus under the labour
               appellate tribunal formula.

     15.11. BUDGET RATIO

Ratio is a mathematical relationship between two or more related figures. Budget
ratios provide information about the performance level, i.e., the extent of deviation
of actual performance from the budgeted performance and whether the actual
performance is favourable or unfavorable. If the ratio is 100% or more, the
performance is considered as favourable and if ratio is less than 100% the
performance is considered as unfavourable.

The following ratios are usually used by the management to measure development
from budget.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.68

Capacity Usage Ratio: This relationship between the budgeted number of working
hours and the maximum possible number of working hours in a budget period.

Standard Capacity Employed Ratio: This ratio indicates the extent to which
facilities were actually utilized during the budget period.

Level of Activity Ratio: This may be defined as the number of standard hours
equivalent to work produced expressed as a percentage of the budget of standard
hours.

Efficiency Ratio: This ratio may be defined as standard hours equivalent of work
produced expressed as a percentage of the actual hours spent in producing the
work.

Calendar Ratio: This ratio may be defined as the relationship between the number
of working days in a period and the number of working as in the relative budget
period.

Budget Ratios:
(i) Efficiency Ratio = Standard Hours×100

                                    Actual Hours
(ii) Activity Ratio = Standard Hours ×100

                                 Budgeted Hours
(iii) Calendar Ratio = Available working days ×100

                                  Budgeted working days

(iv) Standard Capacity Usage Ratio =

Budgeted Hours                                     ×100

Max. possible hours in the budgeted period

(v) Actual Capacity Usage Ratio =

                      Actual Hours worked
                                                                ×100

         Max. possible working hours in a period

(vi) Actual Usage of Budgeted Capacity Ratio = Actual working Hours×100
                                                                          Budgeted Hours

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                          15.69                 a

ILLUSTRATION 7

Following data is available for DKG and Co:

Standard working hours                             8 hours per day of 5 days per week

Maximum capacity                                   50 employees

Actual working                                     40 employees

Actual hours expected to be worked per four week 6,400 hours

Std. hours expected to be earned per four weeks 8,000 hours

Actual hours worked in the four- week period 6,000 hours

Standard hours earned in the four- week period 7,000 hours.

The related period is of 4 weeks. In this period there was a one special day holiday
due to national event. CALCULATE the following ratios:

(1) Efficiency Ratio, (2) Activity Ratio, (3) Calendar Ratio, (4) Standard Capacity Usage
Ratio, (5) Actual Capacity Usage Ratio. (6) Actual Usage of Budgeted Capacity Ratio.

SOLUTION

Maximum Capacity in a budget period

= 50 Employees × 8 Hrs. × 5 Days × 4 Weeks = 8,000 Hrs.

Budgeted Hours

40 Employees × 8 Hrs. × 5 Days × 4 Weeks = 6,400 Hrs.

Actual Hrs. = 6,000 Hrs. (given)

Standard Hrs. for Actual Output = 7,000 Hrs.

Budget No. of Days = 20 Days = 20 Days (4 Weeks x 5 Days)

Actual No. of Days = 20 ­ 1 = 19 Days

1. Efficiency Ratio = Standard Hrs ×100 = 7,000 hours×100        = 116.67%
                        Actual Hrs                 6,000 hours

2. Activity Ratio = StandardHrs ×100 = 7,000 hours ×100 = 109.375%
                  Budgeted Hrs                     6, 400 hours

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.70

3. Calendar Ratio = Available working days ×100 = 19days ×100 = 95%
                 Budgeted working days             20days

4. Standard Capacity Usage Ratio =

Budgeted Hours                                     ×100 = 6, 400 hours×100 = 80%

Max. possible hours in the budgeted period         8,000 hours

5. Actual Capacity Usage Ratio =                   Actual Hoursworked                       ×100

                                                   Max. possible working hours in a period

                                                   = 6,000 hours×100 = 75%
                                                      8,000 hours

6. Actual Usage of Budgeted Capacity Ratio = Actual working Hours×100
                                                                          Budgeted Hours

                                                                  = 6,000 hours ×100 = 93.75%
                                                                       6,400 hours

SUMMARY

 Budget: Budget is a quantitative expression of a plan of action to be pursued
       over a defined period of time. It is statement of an estimated performance to
       be achieved in given time, expressed in monetary or quantitative or both terms.

 Budget Centre: A Budget Centre is a section of an organisation developed
       for the purpose of budgetary control, and is intended to facilitate formulation
       of various budgets with the help of head of the department.

 Budgetary Control: Budgetary Control is the establishment of budgets,
       relating the responsibilities of executives to the requirements of a policy, and
       the continuous comparison of actual with budgeted results, either to secure by
       individual action the objective of that policy or to provide a basis for its revision.

 Budget Manual: The Budget manual is a document or booklet which Contain
       guidelines for the preparation of budget in an organization.

 Budget Period: The period of time for which a budget is prepared and used. It
       may be a year, quarter or a month.

 Classification of Budgets:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.71  a

Capacity based    - Fixed and Flexible

Content based     - Monetary and Physical/quantitative

Functional based  - Purchase, Sale, Production Cost, Administrative,
                         Selling & Distribution, Research & Development,
                         Plant Capital Expenditure, Cash, Plant Utilization.

 Fixed Budget: a fixed budget, is a budget designed to remain unchanged
       irrespective of the level of activity actually attained

 Flexible Budget: a flexible budget is defined as a budget which, by recognizing
       the difference between fixed, semi-variable and variable costs is designed to
       change in relation to the level of activity attained.

 Zero-based Budgeting (ZBB): Zero-based Budgeting (ZBB) is defined as `a
       method of budgeting which requires each cost element to be specifically
       justified, although the activities to which the budget relates are not being
       undertaken for the first time, without approval, the budget allowance is zero

 Performance Budgeting (PB): Performance Budgeting means that budget in
       which the responsibility of various levels of management is predetermined in
       terms of output or result keeping in view the authority vested with them.

 Budget Ratios: Ratio is a mathematical relationship between two or more
       related figures. Budget ratios provide information about the performance level,
       i.e., the extent of deviation of actual performance from the budgeted
       performance and whether the actual performance is favourable or unfavorable.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs)

1. If a company wishes to establish a factory overhead budget system in which
       estimated costs can be derived directly from estimates of activity levels, it
       should prepare a:
       (a) Master budget
       (b) Cash budget

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.72

       (c) Flexible budget
       (d) Fixed budget
2. The classification of fixed and variable cost is useful for the preparation of:
       (a) Master budget
       (b) Flexible budget
       (c) Cash budget
       (d) Capital budget
3. Budget manual is a document:
       (a) Which contains different type of budgets to be formulated only.
       (b) Which contains the details about standard cost of the products to be

               made.
       (c) Setting out the budget organization and procedures for preparing a

               budget including fixation of responsibilities, formats and records required
               for the purpose of preparing a budget and for exercising budgetary
               control system.
       (d) None of the above
4. The budget control organization is usually headed by a top executive who is
       known as:
       (a) General manager
       (b) Budget director/budget controller
       (c) Accountant of the organization
       (d) None of the above
5. "A favourable budget variance is always an indication of efficient performance".
       Do you agree, give reason?
       (a) A favourable variance indicates, saving on the part of the organization
               hence it indicates efficient performance of the organization.
       (b) Under all situations, a favourable variance of an organization speaks
               about its efficient performance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.73  a

       (c) A favourable variance does not necessarily indicate efficient performance,
               because such a variance might have been arrived at by not carrying out
               the expenses mentioned in the budget.

       (d) None of the above.
6. A budget report is prepared on the principle of exception and thus-

       (a) Only unfavourable variances should be shown
       (b) Only favourable variance should be shown
       (c) Both favourable and unfavourable variances should be shown
       (d) None of the above
7. Purchases budget and materials budget are same:
       (a) Purchases budget is a budget which includes only the details of all

               materials purchased
       (b) Purchases budget is a wider concept and thus includes not only purchases

               of materials but also other item's as well
       (c) Purchases budget is different from materials budget; it includes purchases

               of other items only
       (d) None of the above
8. Efficiency ratio is:
       (a) The extent of actual working days avoided during the budget period
       (b) Activity ratio/ capacity ratio
       (c) Whether the actual activity is more or less than budgeted activity
       (d) None of the above
9. Activity Ratio depicts:
       (a) Whether actual capacity utilized exceeds or falls short of the budgeted

               capacity
       (b) Whether the actual hours used for actual production were more or less

               than the standard hours
       (c) Whether actual activity was more or less than the budgeted capacity

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a     COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.74

       (d) None of the above
10. Which of the following is usually a short-term budget:

       (a) Capital expenditure budget
       (b) Research and development budget
       (c) Cash budget
       (d) Sales budget

Theoretical Questions

1. EXPLAIN briefly the concept of `flexible budget'.
2. DISCUSS the components of budgetary control system.
3. LIST the eight functional budgets prepared by a business.
4. DISTINGUISH between Fixed and flexible budget.
5. EXPLAIN the Essentials of budget.
6. STATE the considerations on which capital expenditure budget is prepared.
7. DESCRIBE the steps involved in the budgetary control technique.
8. DESCRIBE the salient features of budget manual.

Practical Problems

1. B Ltd manufactures two products viz., X and Y and sells them through two
       divisions, East and West. For the purpose of Sales Budget to the Budget
       Committee, following information has been made available for the year
       2022-23:

                 Budgeted Sales                             Actual Sales

Product

         East Division West Division East Division West Division

X        800 units at 1,200 units at 1,000 units at 1,400 units at

         `18        `18                            `18      `18

Y        600 units at 1,000 units at 400 units at 800 units at

         `42        `42                            `42      `42

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                     15.75  a

Adequate market studies reveal that product X is popular but underpriced. It is
expected that if the price of X is increased by ` 2, it will, find a ready market.
On the other hand, Y is overpriced and if the price of Y is reduced by ` 2 it will
have more demand in the market. The company management has agreed for
the aforesaid price changes. On the basis of these price changes and the reports
of salesmen, following estimates have been prepared by the Divisional
Managers:

Percentage increase in sales over budgeted sales

Product  East Division                             West Division
    X       + 12.5%                                     + 7.5%
    Y       + 22.5%                                    + 12.5%

With the help of intensive advertisement campaign, following additional sales
(over and above the above-mentioned estimated sales by Divisional Mangers)
are possible:

Product  East Division                             West Division
    X       120 units                                 140 units
    Y        80 units                                 100 units

You are required to PREPARE Sales Budget for 2022-23 after incorporating
above estimates and also SHOW the Budgeted Sales and Actual Sales of
2021-22.

2. During the FY 2021-22, P Limited has produced 60,000 units operating at 50%
       capacity level. The cost structure at the 50% level of activity is as under:

                                                                            (`)

Direct Material                                                   300 per unit
Direct Wages                                                      100 per unit
Variable Overheads                                                100 per unit
Direct Expenses
Factory Expenses (25% fixed)                                       60 per unit
Selling and Distribution Exp. (80% variable)                       80 per unit
Office and Administrative Exp. (100% fixed)                        40 per unit
                                                                   20 per unit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.76

       The company anticipates that in FY 2022-23, the variable costs will go up by
       20% and fixed costs will go up by 15%.

       The selling price per unit will increase by 10% to ` 880

       Required:

       (i) CALCULATE the budgeted profit/ loss for the FY 2021-22.

       (ii) PREPARE an Expense budget on marginal cost basis for the FY 2022-23
               for the company at 50% and 60% level of activity and FIND OUT the
               profits at respective levels.

3. K Ltd. produces and markets a very popular product called `X'. The company is
       interested in presenting its budget for the second quarter of 2022-23.

       The following information are made available for this purpose:

       (i) It expects to sell 1,50,000 bags of `X' during the second quarter of 2022-
              23 at the selling price of ` 1,200 per bag.

       (ii) Each bag of `X' requires 2.5 mtr. of raw ­ material `Y' and 7.5 mtr. of raw
               ­ material `Z'.

       (iii) Stock levels are planned as follows:

Particulars                                        Beginning of  End of Quarter
                                                      Quarter
Finished Bags of `X' (Nos.)
Raw ­ Material `Y' (mtr)                           45,000        33,000
Raw ­ Material `Z' (mtr)
Empty Bag (Nos.)                                   96,000        78,000

                                                   1,71,000      1,41,000

                                                   1,11,000      84,000

(iv) `Y' cost `160 per mtr., `Z' costs `30 per mtr. and `Empty Bag' costs `110
       each.

(v) It requires 9 minutes of direct labour to produce and fill one bag of `X'.
       Labour cost is ` 70 per hour.

(vi) Variable manufacturing costs are ` 60 per bag. Fixed manufacturing
       costs ` 40,00,000 per quarter.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                         15.77  a

(vii) Variable selling and administration expenses are 5% of sales and fixed
       administration and selling expenses are ` 3,75,000 per quarter.

Required

(i) PREPARE a production budget for the said quarter in quantity.

(ii) PREPARE a raw ­ material purchase budget for `Y', `Z' and `Empty Bags'
       for the said quarter in quantity as well as in rupees.

       (iii) COMPUTE the budgeted variable cost to produce one bag of `X'.

4. ABC Ltd. is currently operating at 75% of its capacity. In the past two years, the
       levels of operations were 55% and 65% respectively. Presently, the production
       is 75,000 units. The company is planning for 85% capacity level during 2022-
       23. The cost details are as follows:

Direct Materials                                         55%            65%           75%
Direct Labour                                               (`)            (`)           (`)
Factory Overheads
Selling Overheads                                  11,00,000      13,00,000     15,00,000
Administrative Overheads                            5,50,000       6,50,000      7,50,000
                                                    3,10,000       3,30,000      3,50,000
                                                    3,20,000       3,60,000      4,00,000
                                                    1,60,000       1,60,000      1,60,000

                                                   24,40,000      28,00,000     31,60,000

Profit is estimated @ 20% on sales.

The following increases in costs are expected during the year:

                                                   In percentage

Direct Materials                                   8

Direct Labour                                      5

Variable Factory Overheads                         5

Variable Selling Overheads                         8

Fixed Factory Overheads                            10

Fixed Selling Overheads                            15

Administrative Overheads                           10

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.78

       PREPARE flexible budget for the period 2022-23 at 85% level of capacity. Also
       ascertain profit and contribution.

5. The accountant of manufacturing company provides you the following details
       for year 2021-22:

Direct materials                                           (`)                            (`)
Direct Wages                                       1,75,000 Other variable costs    80,000
Fixed factory overheads                            1,00,000 Other fixed costs       80,000
Variable factory overheads                         1,00,000 Profit                1,15,000
                                                   1,00,000 Sales                 7,50,000

During the year, the company manufactured two products A and B and the
output and costs were:

Output (units)                                              A                              B
Selling price per unit                             2,00,000                       1,00,000
Direct materials per unit
Direct wages per unit                                 ` 2.00                         ` 3.50
                                                      ` 0.50                         ` 0.75
                                                      ` 0.25                         ` 0.50

Variable factory overhead is absorbed as a percentage of direct wages. Other
variable costs have been computed as: Product A ` 0.25 per unit; and B ` 0.30
per unit.

During 2022-23, it is expected that the demand for product A will fall by
25 % and for B by 50%. It is decided to manufacture a further product C, the
cost for which is estimated as follows:

Output (units)                                                                    Product C
Selling price per unit
Direct materials per unit                                                          2,00,000
Direct wages per unit                                                                 ` 1.75
                                                                                      ` 0.40
                                                                                      ` 0.25

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                           15.79  a

       It is anticipated that the other variable costs per unit will be the same as for
       product A.

       PREPARE a budget to present to the management, showing the current position
       and the position for 2022-23. Comment on the comparative results.

6. TQM Ltd. has furnished the following information for the month ending 30th
       June:

Units produced and sold                            Master Budget        Actual     Variance
Sales (`)                                                       80,000     72,000
Direct material (`)                                                                 40,000 (A)
Direct wages (`)                                             3,20,000    2,80,000     6,400 (F)
Variable overheads (`)                                          80,000     73,600
Fixed overhead (`)                                                                   15,200 (F)
Total Cost                                                   1,20,000    1,04,800     2,400 (F)
                                                                40,000     37,600        800 (F)
                                                                40,000     39,200

                                                             2,80,000    2,55,200

The Standard costs of the products are as follows:

                                                                        Per unit (`)

Direct materials (1 kg. at the rate of `1 per kg.)                                 1.00

Direct wages (1 hour at the rate of ` 1.50)                                        1.50

Variable overheads (1 hour at the rate of ` 0.50)                                  0.50

Actual results for the month showed that 78,400 kg. of material were used and
70,400 labour hours were recorded.

Required:

(i) PREPARE Flexible budget for the month and compare with actual results.

(ii) CALCULATE Material, Labour, Variable Overhead and Fixed Overhead
       Expenditure variances.

7. Jigyasa Ltd. is drawing a production plan for its two products Minimax (MM)
       and Heavyhigh (HH) for the year 2022-23. The company's policy is to hold
       closing stock of finished goods at 25% of the anticipated volume of sales of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.80

succeeding month. The following are the estimated data for two products:

Budgeted Production units                          Minimax (MM)           Heavyhigh (HH)
                                                            1,80,000                  1,20,000
Direct material cost per unit                                        (`)                       (`)
Direct labour cost per unit                                        220                      280
Manufacturing overhead                                             130                      120
                                                            4,00,000                  5,00,000

The estimated units to be sold in the first four months of the year 2022-23 are
as under

Minimax          April                              May                    June       July
Heavyhigh        8,000                             10,000                 12,000     16,000
                 6,000                             8,000                  9,000      14,000

       PREPARE production budget for the first quarter in month-wise.

8. Concorde Ltd. manufactures two products using two types of materials and one
       grade of labour. Shown below is an extract from the company's working papers
       for the next month's budget:

                                                                          Product- Product-

                                                                          A          B

Budgeted sales (in units)                                                 2,400      3,600
Budgeted material consumption per unit (in kg):
                                                                                  5  3
         Material-X
         Material-Y                                                               4  6
Standard labour hours allowed per unit of product
                                                                                  3  5

Material-X and Material-Y cost ` 4 and ` 6 per kg and labours are paid
` 25 per hour. Overtime premium is 50% and is payable, if a worker works for
more than 40 hours a week. There are 180 direct workers.

The target productivity ratio (or efficiency ratio) for the productive hours
worked by the direct workers in actually manufacturing the products is 80%. In

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                15.81  a

addition the non-productive down-time is budgeted at 20% of the productive
hours worked.

There are four 5-days weeks in the budgeted period and it is anticipated that
sales and production will occur evenly throughout the whole period.

It is anticipated that stock at the beginning of the period will be:

Product-A                                          400 units
Product-B                                          200 units
Material-X                                         1,000 kg.
Material-Y                                         500 kg.

The anticipated closing stocks for budget period are as below:

Product-A                                          4 days sales
Product-B                                          5 days sales
Material-X                                         10 days consumption
Material-Y                                         6 days consumption

Required:

CALCULATE the Material Purchase Budget and the Wages Budget for the direct
workers, showing the quantities and values, for the next month.

Case Scenarios

1. M Ltd. is a public sector undertaking (PSU), produces a product A. The company
       is in process of preparing its revenue budget for the year 2024. The company
       has the following information which can be useful in preparing the budget:

       (i) It has anticipated 12% growth in sales volume from the year 2023 of
               4,20,000 tonnes.

       (ii) The sales price of ` 23,000 per tonne will be increased by 10% provided
               Wholesale Price Index (WPI) increases by 5%.

       (iii) To produce one tonne of product A, 2.3 tonnes of raw material are
              required. The raw material cost is ` 4,500 per tonne. The price of raw
               material will also increase by 10% if WPI increase by 5%.

       (iv) The projected increase in WPI for 2022 is 4%

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.82

(v) A total of 6,000 employees works for the company. The company works
       26 days in a month.

(vi) 85% of employees of the company are permanent and getting salary
       as per 5- year wage agreement. The earnings per manshift (means an
       employee cost for a shift of 8 hours) is ` 3,000 (excluding terminal
       benefits). The new wage agreement will be implemented from 1st July
       2024 and it is expected that a 15% increase in pay will be given.

(vii) The casual employees are getting a daily wage of ` 850. The wages in
       linked to Consumer Price Index (CPI). The present CPI is 165.17 points
       and it is expected to be 173.59 points in year 2024.

(viii) Power cost for the year 2021 is ` 42,00,000 for 7,00,000 units (1 unit
       = 1 Kwh). 60% of power is used for production purpose (directly related
       to production volume) and remaining are for employee quarters and
       administrative offices.

(ix) During the year 2023, the company has paid ` 60,00,000 for safety
       and maintenance works. The amount will increase in proportion to the
       volume of production.

(x) During the year 2023, the company has paid ` 1,20,000 for the
       purchase of diesel to be used in car hired for administrative purposes.
       The cost of diesel will increase by 15% in year 2024.

(xi) During the year 2023, the company has paid ` 6,00,000 for car hire
       charges (excluding fuel cost). In year 2024, the company has decided
       to reimburse the diesel cost to the car rental company. Doing this will
       attract 5% GST on Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM) basis on which
       the company will not get GST input credit.

(xii) Depreciation on fixed assets for the year 2023 is ` 80,40,00,000 and it
       will be 15% lower in 2024.

You being an associate to the budget controller of the company is expected to
answer the following question:

(i) What would be the sales volume for the FY 2024?

       (a) 4,70,400 tonnes

       (b) 4,70,000 tonnes

       (c) 4,70,600 tonnes

       (d) 4,70,200 tonnes

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                      15.83        a

(ii) What would be quantity of raw material in FY 2024?
       (a) 9,66,000 tonnes
       (b) 1,81,000 tonnes
       (c) 10,81,900 tonnes
       (d) 10,81,920 tonnes

(iii) What would be the car hire charges for the FY 2023?
       (a) ` 6,00,000
       (b) ` 6,50,000
       (c) ` 6,40,000
       (d) ` 6,20,000

(iv) What would be the car hire charges for the FY 2024?
       (a) ` 6,00,000
       (b) ` 7,74,900
       (c) ` 6,83,000
       (d) ` 6,20,000

(v) What would be the budgeted profit/ loss for the year 2024?
       (a) ` 1273.043 lakhs
       (b) (` 5142 lakhs)
       (c) ` 5142 lakhs
       (d) ( ` 1273.043 lakhs)

ANSWERS/ SOLUTIONS

Answers to the MCQs

   1. (c) 2. (b) 3. (c) 4. (b) 5. (c) 6. (c)
   7. (b) 8. (b) 9. (c) 10. (c)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                    a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
      15.84

Answers to the Theoretical Questions

1. Please refer paragraph 8.1
2. Please refer paragraph 5.7
3. Please refer paragraph 8.2
4. Please refer paragraph 8.1
5. Please refer paragraph 2
6. Please refer paragraph 8.2
7. Please refer paragraph 5.3
8. Please refer paragraph 7

Answers to the Practical Problems

1. Statement Showing Sales Budget for 2022-23

                       Product X                                 Product Y       Total

Division  Qty. Rate Amt.                                Qty. Rate Amt.           Amt.
                                                                                    (`)
                       (`)                         (`)           (`)        (`)

East      1,0201 20 20,400 8153 40 32,600 53,000

West      1,4302 20 28,600 1,2254 40 49,000 77,600

Total     1,200                                    49,000 1,000       81,600 1,30,600

Workings
1. 800 × 112.5% +120 = 1,020 units
2. 1,200 × 107.5% + 140 = 1,430 units
3. 600 × 122.5% + 80 = 815 units
4. 1,000 × 112.5% + 100 = 1,225 units

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                             15.85     a

Statement Showing Sales Budget for 2021-22

Division         Product X                              Product Y                   Total

          Qty. Rate Amt.                                Qty. Rate Amt.              Amt.
                                                                                       (`)
                     (`)                           (`)            (`)       (`)

East          800 18 14,400 600 42 25,200 39,600

West      1,200 18 21,600 1,000 42 42,000 63,600

Total     2,000                 36,000 1,600                           67,200 1,03,200

Statement Showing Actual Sales for 2021-22

                     Product X                                   Product Y          Total

Division      Qty. Rate                            Amt. Qty. Rate           Amt.    Amt.
                           (`)                                                 (`)     (`)
East                                               (`)            (`)
West
Total         1,000 18 18,000 400 42 16,800 34,800

              1,400 18 25,200 800 42 33,600 58,800

              2,400                                43,200 1,200        50,400 93,600

2. (i) Calculation of Budgeted profit for the FY 2021-22

                                                                            60,000 units

                                                                       Per unit     Amount
                                                                              (`)           (`)

       Sales                                            (A)            800.00 4,80,00,000

       Variable Costs:

       - Direct Material                                               300.00 1,80,00,000
                                                                       100.00 60,00,000
       - Direct Wages                                                  100.00 60,00,000

       - Variable Overheads                                             60.00 36,00,000
                                                                        60.00 36,00,000
       - Direct Expenses
                                                                        32.00 19,20,000
       - Variable factory expenses
              (75% of `80 p.u.)                                        652.00 3,91,20,000
                                                                       148.00 88,80,000
       - Variable Selling & Dist. exp.
              (80% of `40 p.u.)

       Total Variable Cost                              (B)

       Contribution                                (C) = (A ­ B)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.86

Fixed Costs:

- Office and Admin. exp. (100%)                                       -- 12,00,000
                                                                      -- 12,00,000
- Fixed factory exp. (25%)                                            -- 4,80,000
                                                                      -- 28,80,000
- Fixed Selling & Dist. exp. (20%)                                    -- 60,00,000

Total Fixed Costs                                       (D)

Profit                                             (C ­ D)

(ii) Expense Budget of P Ltd. for the FY 2022-23 at 50% & 60% level

                                                   60,000 units       72,000 units

                                                   Per unit Amount Per unit Amount

                                                   (`)           (`)  (`)           (`)

Sales                                              (A) 880.00 5,28,00,000 880.00 6,33,60,000

Variable Costs:

- Direct Material                                  360.00 2,16,00,000 360.00 2,59,20,000

- Direct Wages                                     120.00 72,00,000 120.00 86,40,000

- Variable Overheads                               120.00 72,00,000 120.00 86,40,000

- Direct Expenses                                  72.00 43,20,000 72.00 51,84,000

- Variable         factory 72.00 43,20,000 72.00 51,84,000
  expenses

- Variable Selling & Dist. 38.40 23,04,000 38.40 27,64,800
  exp.

Total Variable Cost (B) 782.40 4,69,44,000 782.40 5,63,32,800

Contribution (C) = (A ­ B) 97.60 58,56,000 97.60 70,27,200

Fixed Costs:

- Office and Admin. exp.                           -- 13,80,000       -- 13,80,000
  (100%)

- Fixed factory exp.                               -- 13,80,000       -- 13,80,000
  (25%)

- Fixed Selling & Dist.                            -- 5,52,000        -- 5,52,000
  exp. (20%)

Total Fixed Costs (D)                              -- 33,12,000       -- 33,12,000

Profit             (C ­ D)                         -- 25,44,000       -- 37,15,200

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                                  15.87  a

3. (i) Production Budget of `X' for the Second Quarter

Particulars                                                                    Bags (Nos.)
Budgeted Sales                                                                      1,50,000
Add: Desired Closing stock                                                            33,000
Total Requirements                                                                  1,83,000
Less: Opening stock                                                                 (45,000)
Required Production                                                                 1,38,000

(ii) Raw­Materials Purchase Budget in Quantity as well as in ` for
       1,38,000 Bags of `X'

   Particulars                                      `Y'           `Z'          Empty Bags
                                                   Mtr.          Mtr.               Nos.
Production                                                                                  1.0
Requirements                                                2.5           7.5
Per bag of `X'
Requirement for                                    3,45,000      10,35,000     1,38,000
Production

                   (1,38,000 × 2.5) (1,38,000 × 7.5) (1,38,000 × 1)

Add: Desired                                       78,000        1,41,000             84,000
Closing Stock

Total                                              4,23,000      11,76,000     2,22,000
Requirements

Less: Opening                                      (96,000)      (1,71,000) (1,11,000)
Stock

Quantity to be                                     3,27,000      10,05,000     1,11,000
purchased

Cost          per                                  `160          `30                  `110

mtr./Bag

Cost          of                                   5,23,20,000 3,01,50,000 1,22,10,000

Purchase (`)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
    15.88

    (iii) Computation of Budgeted Variable Cost of Production of
           1 Bag of `X'

           Particulars                                                   (`)
           Raw ­ Material
                                                                    400.00
                  Y 2.5 mtr @160                                    225.00
                  Z 7.5 mtr @30                                     110.00
                  Empty Bag
           Direct Labour (`70× 9 minutes / 60 minutes)               10.50
           Variable Manufacturing Overheads                          60.00
           Variable Cost of Production per bag                      805.50

4.                                                 ABC Ltd.

           Budget for 85% capacity level for the period 2022-23

    Budgeted production (units)                                     85,000

    Direct Material (note 1)                                 Per Unit (`) Amount (`)
    Direct Labour (note 2)
    Variable factory overhead (note 3)                       21.60 18,36,000
    Variable selling overhead (note 4)
                                                             10.50  8,92,500

                                                             2.10   1,78,500

                                                             4.32   3,67,200

    Variable cost                                            38.52 32,74,200

    Fixed factory overhead (note 3)                                 2,20,000

    Fixed selling overhead (note 4)                                 1,15,000

    Administrative overhead                                         1,76,000

    Fixed cost                                                      5,11,000

    Total cost                                                      37,85,200

    Add: Profit 20% on sales or 25% on total cost                   9,46,300

    Sales                                                           47,31,500

    Contribution (Sales ­ Variable cost)                            14,57,300

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                             15.89  a

Working Notes:
1. Direct Materials:

                                                   (`)                              (`)

75% Capacity          15,00,000 65% Capacity                                13,00,000
                                                                            11,00,000
65% Capacity          13,00,000 55% Capacity                                2,00,000

10% change in 2,00,000 10% change in capacity
capacity

For 10% increase in capacity, i.e., for increase by 10,000 units, the total
direct material cost regularly changes by ` 2,00,000

Direct material cost (variable) = ` 2,00,000 ÷ 10,000 = ` 20

After 8% increase in price, direct material cost per unit = ` 20 × 1.08
= ` 21.60

Direct material cost for 85,000 budgeted units = 85,000 × ` 21.60
= ` 18,36,000

2. Direct Labour:

                                                        (`)                         (`)

75% Capacity                                       7,50,000 65% Capacity         6,50,000

65% Capacity                                       6,50,000 55% Capacity         5,50,000

10% change in                                      1,00,000 10% change in   1,00,000
capacity                                                          capacity

For 10% increase in capacity, direct labour cost regularly changes by
` 1,00,000.

Direct labour cost per unit = ` 1,00,000 ÷ 10,000 = ` 10

After 5% increase in price, direct labour cost per unit = ` 10 × 1.05
= ` 10.50

Direct labour for 85,000 units = 85,000 units × ` 10.50 = ` 8,92,500.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.90

3. Factory overheads are semi-variable overheads:

                                                   (`)                (`)
                                                               3,30,000
75% Capacity     3,50,000 65% Capacity                         3,10,000

65% Capacity     3,30,000 55% Capacity                          20,000

10% change in    20,000 10% change in
capacity                     capacity

       Variable factory overhead = ` 20,000 ÷ 10,000 = ` 2
       Variable factory overhead for 75,000 units = 75,000 × ` 2 = `1,50,000
       Fixed factory overhead = `3,50,000 ­ ` 1,50,000 = ` 2,00,000.
       Variable factory overhead after 5% increase = ` 2 × 1.05 = ` 2.10
       Fixed factory overhead after 10% increase = ` 2,00,000 × 1.10
       = ` 2,20,000.
4. Selling overhead is semi-variable overhead:

75% Capacity            (`)                                           (`)
                 4,00,000 65% Capacity                         3,60,000
65% Capacity     3,60,000 55% Capacity                         3,20,000

10% change in     40,000 10% change in capacity                 40,000
capacity

Variable selling overhead = ` 40,000 ÷ 10,000 units = ` 4

Variable selling overhead for 75,000 units = 75,000 × ` 4 = ` 3,00,000.

Fixed selling overhead = ` 4,00,000 ­ ` 3,00,000 = ` 1,00,000

Variable selling overhead after 8% increase = ` 4 × 1.08 = ` 4.32

Fixed selling overhead after 15% increase               = ` 1,00,000 × 1.15
                                                        = ` 1,15,000

5. Administrative overhead is fixed:

After 10% increase = ` 1,60,000 × 1.10 = ` 1,76,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                   BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                  15.91         a

5.

              Budget Showing Current Position and Position for 2022-23

                     Position for 2021-22                                 Position for 2022-23

                     A       B                          Total     A       B       C             Total

                                                        (A+B)                                   (A+B+C)

    Sales (units)    2,00,000 1,00,000                  ­         1,50,000 50,000 2,00,000      ­

                        (`)                        (`)     (`)       (`)     (`)     (`)               (`)

    (A) Sales        4,00,000 3,50,000 7,50,000 3,00,000 1,75,000 3,50,000 8,25,000

    Direct Material 1,00,000 75,000 1,75,000 75,000 37,500 80,000 1,92,500

    Direct wages     50,000 50,000 1,00,000 37,500 25,000 50,000 1,12,500

    Factory          50,000 50,000 1,00,000 37,500 25,000 50,000 1,12,500
    overhead
    (variable)

    Other variable   50,000  30,000                     80,000    37,500 15,000   50,000 1,02,500
    costs

    (B) Marginal Cost 2,50,000 2,05,000 4,55,000 1,87,500 1,02,500 2,30,000 5,20,000

    (C) Contribution 1,50,000 1,45,000 2,95,000 1,12,500 72,500 1,20,000 3,05,000
    (A-B)

    Fixed costs ­                                       1,00,000                                1,00,000
    Factory

    ­ Others                                            80,000                                  80,000

    (D) Total fixed                                     1,80,000                                1,80,000
    cost

    Profit                                              1,15,000                                1,25,000
    (C ­ D)

    Comments: Introduction of Product C is likely to increase profit by ` 10,000 (i.e.
    from ` 1,15,000 to ` 1,25,000) in 2022-23 as compared to 2021-22. Therefore,
    introduction of product C is recommended.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.92

6. (i) Statement showing Flexible Budget and its comparison with actual

                 Master                            Flexible Budget        Actual       Variance
                 Budget                              (at standard           for
                                                          cost)
                 80,000                                                   72,000
                  units                             Per 72,000             units
                                                    unit units

A. Sales         3,20,000 4.00 2,88,000                                   2,80,000 8,000 (A)
                                                                            73,600 1,600 (A)
B. Direct material 80,000 1.00 72,000
                                                                          1,04,800 3,200 (F)
C. Direct wages  1,20,000 1.50 1,08,000                                     37,600 1,600 (A)

D. Variable                                        40,000 0.50 36,000
      overhead

E. Total variable 2,40,000                            3.00 2,16,000       2,16,000                 -
      cost

F. Contribution                                    80,000 1.00 72,000     64,000                   -

G. Fixed overhead 40,000 0.50 40,000                                      39,200 800 (F)

H. Net profit                                      40,000 0.50 32,000     24,800 7,200 (A)

(ii) Variances:

Direct Material Cost Variance = Standard Cost for Actual output
                                                ­Actual cost

                                                   = ` 72,000 ­ ` 73,600 = ` 1,600 (A)

Direct Material Price Variance = Actual Quantity (Standard rate
                                                ­ Actual Rate)

                                                   =  78,400  units       1.00 -  ` 73, 600 
                                                                       `                           
                                                                                  78,  400  units  

                                                   = ` 4,800 (F)

Direct Material Usage Variance = Standard Rate (Std. Qty. ­
                                                Actual Quantity)

                                                   = ` 1 (72,000 units ­ 78,400 units)

                                                   = ` 6,400 (A)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                    15.93            a

       Direct Labour Cost Variance = Standard Cost for actual
                                                       output ­ Actual cost

                                                   = ` 1,08,000 ­ `1,04,800 = `3,200 (F)

       Direct Labour Rate Variance = Actual Hour (Std Rate ­ Actual
                                                       Rate)

                                                   =  70,400  hours     1.5 -  ` 1,04, 800 
                                                                     `                          
                                                                               70,  400  units  

                                                   = ` 800 (F)

       Direct Labour Efficiency                    = Standard Rate (Standard Hour ­
                                                       Actual Hour)

                                                   = ` 1.5 (72,000 ­ 70,400) = ` 2,400 (F)

       Variable Overhead                           = Recovered variable overhead ­
                                                       Actual variable overhead

                                                   = (72,000 units  ` 0.50) ­ ` 37,600
                                                   = ` 1,600(A)

       Fixed Overhead Expenditure = Budgeted fixed overhead ­
                                                       Actual fixed overhead

                                                   = ` 40,000 ­ ` 39,200 = ` 800 (F)

7. Production Budget of Product Minimax and Heavyhigh (in units)

                  April                            May          June                Total

                  MM HH MM HH MM HH MM HH

Sales             8,000 6,000 10,000 8,000 12,000 9,000 30,000 23,000

Add: Closing Stock 2,500 2,000 3,000 2,250                    4,000 3,500 9,500          7,750

(25% of next
month's sale)

Less: Opening Stock 2,000* 1,500* 2,500 2,000 3,000 2,250 7,500 5,750

Production units  8,500 6,500 10,500 8,250 13,000 10,250 32,000 25,000

* Opening stock of April is the closing stock of March, which is as per company's policy
25% of next month'' sale.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                a           COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
  15.94

                            Production Cost Budget

Element of cost                                    Rate (`)          Amount (`)

Direct Material                                    MM HH             MM            HH
Direct Labour
Manufacturing Overhead                             (32,000 (25,000
(4,00,000 ÷ 1,80,000 × 32,000)                     units) units)
(5,00,000 ÷ 1,20,000 × 25,000)
                                                   220 280 70,40,000 70,00,000

                                                   130 120 41,60,000 30,00,000

                                                                     71,111
                                                                                      1,04,167

                                                                     1,12,71,111 1,01,04,167

8. Number of days in budget period = 4 weeks × 5 days = 20 days
                                 Number of units to be produced

                                                                    Product-A Product-B

                                                                          (units)      (units)

Budgeted Sales                                                            2,400        3,600
                                                                            480          900
Add: Closing stock                                                          400          200

  2,400 units  ×4             3,26000duaynsits×    5         
    20 days                 
                   days                               days 

Less: Opening stock

                                                                          2,480        4,300

(i) Material Purchase Budget

                                                   Material-X (Kg.)       Material-Y (Kg.)

  Material required:                                        12,400                  9,920
       Product-A                                   (2,480 units × 5 kg.)  (2,480 units × 4 kg.)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                     15.95        a

        Product-B                                           12,900                 25,800
                                                   (4,300 units × 3 kg.)  (4,300 units × 6 kg.)

      Add: Closing stock                                  25,300            35,720

        252,300d0akygs s.×10days                          12,650            10,716
                                       
                                                           1,000              500
        352,702d0akygs s.×                                36,950            45,936
                            6 days 
                                                            `4                 `6
      Less: Opening stock                               ` 1,47,800        ` 2,75,616

      Quantity to be purchased

      Rate per kg. of Material

      Total Cost

(ii) Wages Budget

                                                   Product-A (Hours) Product-B (Hours)

Units to be produced                               2,480 units            4,300 units
                                                         3                      5
Standard hours allowed per
unit

Total Standard              Hours                  7,440                  21,500
allowed

Productive hours required 7, 440hours =9,300                              21,500hours =26,875
for production                                     80%                         80%

Add: Non-Productive down                           1,860 hours.                     5,375 hours.

time                                               (20% of 9,300 hours)   (20% of 26,875 hours)

Hours to be paid                                   11,160                 32,250

Total Hours to be paid                             = 43,410 hours (11,160 + 32,250)

Hours to be paid at normal = 4 weeks × 40 hours × 180 workers

rate                                               = 28,800 hours

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.96

Hours to be paid at premium                        = 43,410 hours ­ 28,800 hours = 14,610 hours
rate

Total wages to be paid                             = 28,800 hours × ` 25 + 14,610 hours × ` 37.5
                                                   = ` 7,20,000 + ` 5,47,875
                                                   = ` 12,67,875

Answers To The Case Scenarios

1.
            i. (a) ii. (d) iii. (a) iv. (b) v. (d)

 (i) (a) 4,70,400 tonnes
 (ii) (d) 10,81,920 tonnes
 (iii) (a) ` 6,00,000
 (iv) (b) `7,74,900
 (v) (d) (`1273.043 lakhs)
Revenue Budget (Flexible Budget) of M Ltd. for the Year 2024

Particulars                                        PY 2023      CY 2024

A Sales Volume (Tonnes)                            4,20,000              4,70,400
                                                     23,000
B Selling Price per tonne                                       [112%×4,20,000]
       (`)
                                                                           23,000

                                                   (` in lakh)  (` in lakh)

C Sales value [A×B]                                96,600       1,08,192
D Raw material Cost:

(i) Qty. of Material [2.3                          9,66,000     10,81,920
       tonnes × A] (tonnes)

(ii) Price per tonne (`)                           4,500        4,500

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
BUDGETS AND BUDGETARY CONTROL                                        15.97  a

(iii) Total raw material                           43,470            48,686.40
       cost (` in lakh)
       [(i)×(ii)]

E Wages & Salary Cost:

(i) Wages to casual                                2,386.80                 2,508.47
       employees
                                                   [900×26×12×`850] [900×26×12×`893.33]
        (15%×6,000 = 900
        employees)

(ii) Salary to permanent                           47,736            51,316.20

employees                                          [5100×26×12×`3,000] [(5100×26×6×`3,000)+

(85%×6,000 = 5,100                                                   (5100×26×6×`3,450)]

employees)

(iii) Total wages & salary                         50,122.80         53,824.67
       [(i)+(ii)+(iii)]

F Power cost:

(i) For production (units)                                 4,20,000           4,70,400

                                                   [60%×7,00,000]    [112%×4,20,000]

(ii) For employees &                               2,80,000                 2,80,000
       offices (units)

        [40%×7,00.000]

(iii) Total         Power                          7,00,000                 7,50,400
       consumption  (units)
       [(i)+(ii)]

(iv) Power rate per unit (`)                       6.00                        6.00

[`42,00,000÷7,00,000]

(v) Total power cost                               42                       45.024
       [(iii)×(iv)]

G Safety            and                            60                       67.20

maintenance Cost                                                     [112%×4,20,000]

H Diesel cost                                      1.2                         -

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              a  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING
15.98

I Car Hire charge:                                          6                  6
(i) Car hire charge                                          -             1.38
(ii) Fuel reimbursement                                      -
                                                            6      [115%×1.2]
       cost                                           8,040
                                                   1,01,742              0.369
(iii) GST@5% on RCM basis                           (5,142)
       [5%×(i+ii)]                                                       7.749

(iv) Total Car hire charge                                               6,834
       cost [(i)+(ii)+(iii)]
                                                                [85%×8040]
J Depreciation
                                                                1,09,465.043
K Total Cost [Sum of D to
       J]                                                       (1,273.043)

L Profit/ (Loss) [C-L]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
