         3

CHAPTER     3

EMPLOYEE COST AND
DIRECT EXPENSES

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to-
 State the meaning and importance of Employee (Labour)

      Cost in an organisation.

 Discuss the attendance and payroll procedures.

 State the meaning and treatment of idle time and overtime
      cost.

 Compute employee (labour) turnover, discuss its meaning,
      reasons, methods of measurement and cost impacts.

 Discuss and apply the various methods of remuneration and
      incentive system in calculation of wages, bonus etc.

 Discuss the efficiency rating procedures.

 Discuss the measurement and treatment of Direct expenses.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.2  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

     1. INTRODUCTION

To manufacture a product or to make provision for service, the role of human
exertion is inevitable. The term used for human resources may include workers,
employees, labourers, staffs etc. Whatsoever nomenclature may be used to denote
them; they are required to be compensated for their exertions. The compensation
so paid, either in monetary terms or in kind and facility is known as wages. Cost of
paying wages to workers is popularly known as labour cost as it relates to labour
(exertion) they put for manufacturing of product or provision of services; hence,
employee cost is also interchangeably known as labour cost. In a nutshell,
employee cost is wider term which includes wages, salary, bonus, incentives
etc. paid to an employee and charged to a cost object as labour cost.

Unlike other costs, employee costs are influenced by human behavior. Due to this
peculiarity, divergence in employee compensation is observed across the different
industries. Wages are determined on both quantitative and qualitative factors like
volume of work, skills required etc. Hence, it is necessary that employees should

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                            3.3 3.3

be monitored, measured, and compensated appropriately to achieve economy in
cost, efficiency in performance and effectiveness in desired output.

2. EMPLOYEE (LABOUR) COST

Employee (Labour) Cost: Benefits paid or payable to the employees of an entity,
whether permanent, or temporary for the services rendered by them. Employee cost
includes payments made in cash or kind. Employee cost includes the following:

(i) Wages and salary;
(ii) Allowances and incentives;
(iii) Payment for overtimes;
(iv) Employer's contribution to Provident fund and other welfare funds;
(v) Other benefits (leave with pay, free or subsidised food, leave travel

       concession etc.) etc.
Classification of Employee (Labour) Cost: Employee cost are broadly
classified as direct and indirect employee cost.

(i) Direct Employee (Labour) Cost

       Benefits paid or payable to the employees which can be attributed to a
       cost object in an economically feasible manner. This can be easily identified
       and allocated to an activity, contract, cost centre, customer, process,
       product etc.

(ii) Indirect Employee (Labour) Cost

       Benefits paid or payable to the employees, which cannot be directly
       attributable to a particular cost object in an economically feasible
       manner.

Distinction between Direct and Indirect Employee Cost

Direct employee cost                               Indirect employee cost

1. It is the cost incurred in payment 1. Cost incurred for payment of

of employees who are directly                      employees who are not directly

engaged in the production                          engaged in the production

process.                                           process.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         3.4             COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

2. Direct employee cost can be easily 2. Indirect employee                 cost is
                                                                                some
identified and allocated to cost                   apportioned         on

unit.                                              appropriate basis.

3. Direct employee cost varies with 3. Indirect employee cost may not

the volume of production and                       vary with the volume of

has positive relationship with the                 production.

volume.

3. EMPLOYEE (LABOUR) COST CONTROL

Employee costs are associated with human beings. To control employee costs one
has to understand human behavior. Employee cost control means control over the
cost incurred on employees. Control over employee costs does not imply control
over the size of the wage bill; it also does not imply that wages of each employee
should be kept as low as possible.

The aim should be to keep the wages per unit of output as low as possible.
This can only be achieved by giving employees appropriate compensation to
encourage efficiency so that optimum output can be achieved in effective
manner.

A well-motivated team of employees can bring about wonders. Each concern
should, therefore, constantly strive to raise the productivity of employee. The
efforts for the control of employee costs should begin from the very beginning.
There has to be a concerted effort by all the concerned departments.

       Department                                  Functions

1. Personnel Department  (i) On receipt of employee requisition from the
                              various departments it searches for the
                              required skills and qualification.

                         (ii) It ensures that the persons recruited possess
                              the requisite qualification and skills required
                              for the job.

                         (iii) Arranges proper training for the newly
                              recruited employees and workshops for
                              existing employees.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.5 3.5

2. Engineering and Work  (iv) Maintains all personal and job related
     Study Department         records of the employees.

3. Time-keeping          (v) Evaluation of performance from time to time
     Department
                         (i) Prepares plans and specifications for each
4. Payroll Department         job.
5. Cost Accounting
                         (ii) Providing training and guidance to the
     Department               employees.

                         (iii) Supervises production activities.
                         (iv) Conducts time and motion studies.
                         (v) Undertakes job analysis.
                         (vi) Conducts job evaluation.

                         (i) Concerned with the maintenance of
                              attendance records i.e. time keeping and

                         (ii) Time spent by an employee on various jobs
                              i.e. time booking etc.

                         (i) The preparation of payroll of the employees.
                         (ii) It disburses salary and wage payments.

                         (i) Accumulation and classification of employee
                              costs.

                         (ii) Analysis and allocation of costs to various
                              cost centres or cost objects

3.1 Important Factors for the Control of Employee Cost

To exercise an effective control over the employee costs, the essential requisite is
efficient utilisation of employee and allied factors. The main points which need
consideration for controlling employee costs are the following:
(i) Assessment of manpower requirements.
(ii) Control over time-keeping and time-booking.
(iii) Time & Motion Study.
(iv) Control over idle time and overtime.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.6  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(v) Control over employee turnover.

(vi) Wage and Incentive systems.

(vii) Job Evaluation and Merit Rating.

(viii) Employee productivity.

3.2 Collection of Employee Costs

The task of collecting employee costs is performed by the Cost Accounting
Department which record separately wages paid to direct and indirect employee.
It is the duty of this department to ascertain the effective wages paid per hour in
each department and to analyse the total payment of wages of each department
into:

(i) the amount included in the direct cost of goods produced or jobs
       completed;

(ii) the amount treated as indirect employee cost and thus included in
       overheads; and

(iii) the amount treated as the cost of idle time and hence loss.

(iv) the amount treated as abnormal loss/ gain and to be transferred to profit
       and loss account.

Through this process costs of various jobs are ascertained. Naturally, in this the
proper recording of time spent by the employees is essential.

     4. ATTENDANCE & PAYROLL PROCEDURES

4.1 Attendance Procedure / Time-keeping

It refers to correct recording of the employees' attendance time. Students may
note the difference between "time keeping" and "time booking". The latter refers
to break up of time on various jobs while the former implies a record of total time
spent by the employees in a factory.

Objectives of Time-keeping: Correct recording of employees' attendance time is
of utmost importance where payment is made on the basis of time worked.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.7 3.7

Where payment is made by results viz; straight piece work, it would still be
necessary to correctly record attendance for the purpose of ensuring that proper
discipline and adequate rate of production are maintained. The objectives of
time-keeping are as follows:

(i) For the preparation of payrolls.

(ii) For calculating overtime.

(iii) For ascertaining and controlling employee cost.

(iv) For ascertaining idle time.

(v) For disciplinary purposes.

(vi) For overhead distribution.

Methods of Time-keeping: There are various methods of time-keeping, which
may be categorized into manual and mechanical methods. The choice of a
particular method depends upon the requirements and policy of an entity; but
whichever method is followed, it should make a correct record of the time by
incurring minimum possible expenditure and it should minimise the risk of
fraudulent payments of wages. The examples of time keeping methods are
follows:

1. Manual Methods

       (a) Attendance Register Method- Under this method, an attendance
               register is kept to record the arrival and departure time of an
               employee. This method is simple and inexpensive and is suitable for
               small organisations. However, this method may lead to dishonest
               practice of time manipulation by way of recording wrong time and
               back date entry in collusion with time keeper.

       (b) Metal Disc/ Token Method- This method of time recording is very
               old and is almost obsolete in practice. Under this method, each
               employee is allotted a metal disc or a token with a hole bearing his
               identification number. The token is kept or handed to the time keeper
               who record the token number in his register. Like attendance register
               method, this method also has some disadvantages like error in
               recording, proxy attendance etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.8  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

2. Mechanical/ Automated Methods

       (a) Punch Card Attendance- Under this method, each employee is
               provided a card for marking attendance. A punch card contains data
               related with the employee in digital form. In punch card attendance
               system, an employee needs to either insert or wave his card to a card
               reader which then ensures whether the correct person is logging in
               and/or out. This system does not require to employ any time keeper
               and minimises the risk of recording error and time manipulation.

       (b) Bio-Metric Attendance system- Under bio-metric attendance system
               attendance is marked by recognizing an employee on the basis of
               physical and behavioural traits. An employee's unique identity like
               finger print, face and retina image etc. are kept in a database which is
               matched at the time of marking of attendance before the attendance
               device for this purpose. Bio-metric attendance system includes
               fingerprint recognition system, face recognition system, Time and
               attendance tracking technology etc. This system reduces the risk of
               time manipulation and proxy attendance. However, it may not be
               suitable for small organisations due to cost associated with set-up and
               maintenance.

       Requisites of a Good Time-Keeping System: A good time-keeping system
       should have following requisites:

       1. System of time-keeping should be such which should not allow proxy
               for another employee under any circumstances.

       2. There should also be a provision of recording of time of piece
               employees so that regular attendance and discipline may be
               maintained. This is necessary to maintain uniformity of flow of
               production.

       3. Time of arrival as well as time of departure of employees should be
               recorded so that total time of employees may be recorded and wages
               may be calculated accordingly.

       4. As far as possible, method of recording of time should be mechanical
               so that chances of disputes regarding time may not arise between
               employees and the time-keeper.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.9 3.9

       5. Late-comers should record late arrivals. Any relaxation by the time-
               keeper in this regard will encourage indiscipline.

       6. The system should be simple, smooth and quick. Unnecessary queuing
               for marking attendance should be avoided.

       7. The system should be reviewed and maintained periodically to prevent
               any error.

4.2 Time-Booking

Time keeping just records the time spent by an employee in the premises for
production but it does not show how much time a person spent on a particular
job. Time booking refers to a method wherein each activity of an employee is
recorded. This data recorded is further used for measure the time spent on a
particular job for costing, measurement of efficiency, fixation of responsibility etc.

Time booking for costing: The time spent on a particular job or activity is used
to compute the cost of the job or activity.

Time booking to measure efficiency: The efficiency of the employees is
measures by comparing the actual time taken by an employee with the standard
time that should have been taken.

Time booking for fixation of responsibility: The time booked data is used to
analyse the variance in time taken by an employee on a particular job or process
with respect to standard time to see the reasons for the variance. The reasons for
variance is further classified as controllable and uncontrollable. The controllable
reasons are those which can be avoided by due care and efficiency. On the other
hand, uncontrollable reasons cannot be avoided under the normal circumstances.
Employees or any other concerned person or departments are made accountable
for variance under controllable reasons.

For the collection of all such data, a separate record, generally known as Time (or
Job) card, is kept.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.10  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

The time (or job) card can be of two types:

· One containing analysis of time with reference to each job: A separate
       job card is employed in respect of a job undertaken; where a job involves
       several operations, a separate entry is made in respect of each operation.

       Thus, the job card would record the total time spent on a particular job or
       operation. If a number of people are engaged on the same job or operation,
       the time of all those employees would be booked on the same card.

       One advantage of this method is that it provides complete data on the
       employee content of job or operation collectively so that the computation
       of employee cost is greatly facilitated.

       But this method has drawbacks as well. Since an employee's job timing is
       scattered over a number of job cards the time spent on all these jobs and
       idle time must be abstracted periodically for finding each employee's total
       time spent on different jobs and the time for which he remained idle during
       the period. The total of these two times (job and idle) must obviously equal
       his total attendance time, as shown by his attendance record.

· The other with reference to each employee: In this case, it would greatly
       facilitate reconciliation of the employee's job time with his attendance time
       recorded.

       Under this system, a separate card would be used for each employee for each
       day or for each week and the time which he spends on different jobs (and also
       any idle time) would be recorded in the same card so that the card would
       have a complete history on it as to how his time had been spent during the
       period.

       The format of job or time may vary industry to industry and according to
       the accounting system into used.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                                                 3.113.11

4.3 Payroll Procedure                              Personnel/ HR
                                                   Department
Steps included in this process are as under:

     Time -keeping
       Department

                                                                             2. Employee Details
1. Time and Attendance
              Payroll
           Department

                     3. Wage and Salary Sheet

           Cost/ Accounting                        5. Deposit of deductions and
              Department                           contributions

4. Payment after deductions and
contributions

Employees                                          Statutory Bodies

                                 Diagram: Payroll Procedures

1. Time and Attendance details: A detailed sheet of number of days or hours
       worked by each employee (in case of time-based payment) and units or
       percentage of work (in case of piece rate) as reflected by the time keeping
       methods are sent to the payroll department by the time keeping department.
       Further, payroll department with the help of time booking records calculate
       any further incentives such as overtime payment, bonus to be paid to the
       employees.

2. List of employees and other details: A list of employees on roll and the
       rate at which they will be paid is sent by the personnel/ HR department.
       Payroll department should ensure that no unauthorised or bogus employee
       is paid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       3.12           COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

3. Computation of wages and other incentives: Payroll department based
       on the details provided by the time keeping department and personnel
       department calculate wages/ salary to be paid to the employees. Payroll
       department prepares pay slip for all employees authorized by the personnel

       department and forward the same to the cost/ accounting department for
       further deductions and payment.

4. Payment to the employees: Cost/ accounting department deduct all
       statutory deduction such as employee's contribution to provident fund and
       employee state insurance (ESI) scheme, TDS on salary etc. After all
       deductions wages/ salary is paid to the employees.

5. Deposit of all statutory liabilities: All statutory deduction made from
       wages/ salary of the employees alongwith employer's contributions such as
       provident fund and employee state insurance scheme are paid to the
       respective statutory bodies.

The followings are generally deducted from the payroll

Type of deductions                                              Description

Statutory Deductions

1. Provident fund                                  Employee's contribution to the Provident
                                                   fund is deducted from the salary/ wages of
                                                   the concerned employee.

2. Employee State Insurance Employee's contribution to the ESI is

Scheme (ESI)                                       deducted from the salary/ wages.

3. Tax Deduction at Source Employer is obliged to deduct tax at source if

(TDS)                                              it will be paying to the employee net salary

                                                   exceeding maximum exemption limit, in equal

                                                   monthly instalments to the income tax

                                                   department.

4. Professional Tax                                Professional tax is a state level tax imposed for
                                                   carrying on business, profession or service.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                         3.133.13

Other Deductions

1. Voluntary contribution to If any employee so desires may contribute

Provident fund                                     over and above the contribution payable by

                                                   the employer.

2. Contribution to     any An employee may contribute to any
     benevolent fund.          benevolent fund voluntarily by putting a
                               request to the payroll department.

3. Loan deductions                                 Instalments of any loan taken by the
                                                   employee.

4. Other advances and dues                         Other advances like festival advance and
                                                   unadjusted advances taken.

5. IDLE TIME

The time during which no production is carried-out because the worker remains
idle but are paid. In other words, it is the difference between the time paid and the
time booked. Idle time can be normal or abnormal. The time for which employees are
paid includes holidays, paid leaves, allowable rest or off time etc.

Normal idle time: It is the time which cannot be avoided or reduced in the normal
course of business.

Causes                                             Treatment

1. The time lost between factory gate              It is treated as a part of cost of
    and the place of work,                         production. Thus, in the case of direct
                                                   workers an allowance for normal idle
                                                   time is considered setting of
                                                   standard hours or standard rate.

2. The interval between one job and                In case of indirect workers, normal
    another,                                       idle time is considered for the
                                                   computation of overhead rate.

3. The setting up time for the machine,

4. Normal rest time, break for lunch etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.14                 COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Abnormal idle time: Apart from normal idle time, there may be factors which give
rise to abnormal idle time.

          Causes                                   Treatment

1. Idle time may also arise due to                 Abnormal idle time cost is not included
    abnormal factors like lack of                  as a part of production cost and is
    coordination                                   shown as a separate item in the Costing
                                                   Profit and Loss Account.
2. Power failure, Breakdown of                     The cost of abnormal idle time should
    machines                                       be further categorised into controllable
                                                   and uncontrollable. For each category,
3. Non-availability of raw materials,              the break-up of cost due to various
                                                   factors should be separately shown.
strikes,  lockouts,            poor                This would help the management in
                                                   fixing responsibility for controlling idle
supervision, fire, flood etc.                      time.
                                                   Management should aim at eliminating
4. The causes for abnormal idle                    controllable idle time and on a long-
    time should be further analysed                term basis reducing even the normal
    into controllable and uncontroll-              idle time. This would require a detailed
    able.                                          analysis of the causes leading to such
                                                   idle time.
(i) Controllable abnormal idle
      time refers to that time
      which could have been put
      to productive use had the
      management been more
      alert and efficient. All such
      time which could have been
      avoided is controllable idle
      time.

(ii) Uncontrollable abnormal idle
      time refers to time lost due
      to abnormal causes, over
      which management does not
      have any control e.g.,
      breakdown of machines,
      flood etc. may be cha-
      racterised as uncontrollable
      idle time.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                3.153.15

ILLUSTRATION 1

`X' an employee of ABC Co. gets the following emoluments and benefits:

(a) Basic pay                                      ` 10,000 p.m.

(b) Dearness allowance                             ` 2,000 p.m.

(c) Bonus                                          20% of salary and D.A.

(d) Other allowances                               ` 2,500 p.m.

(e) Employer's contribution to P.F.                10% of salary and D.A.

`X' works for 2,400 hours per annum, out of which 400 hours are non-productive
and treated as normal idle time. You are required to COMPUTE the effective hourly
cost of employee `X'.

SOLUTION

Statement showing computation of effective hourly cost of employee `X'

                                                   Per month (`) Per annum (`)

(A) Earning of Employee `X':

Basic pay                                          10,000                  1,20,000

Dearness Allowance                                 2,000                   24,000

Bonus                                              2,400                   28,800

Employer's contribution to provident fund          1,200                   14,400

Other allowances                                   2,500                   30,000

                                                   18,100             2,17,200
                                                                  2,000 hours
 (B) Effective working hours (refer workings)
 (C) Effective hourly cost {(A) ÷ (B)}                                `108.60
Workings:

Calculation of effective working hours:

Annual working hours less Normal idle time = 2,400 hours ­ 400 hours = 2,000 hours.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.16      COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

ILLUSTRATION 2

In a factory working six days in a week and eight hours each day, a worker is paid
at the rate of ` 100 per day basic plus D.A. @ 120% of basic. He is allowed to take
30 minutes off during his hours shift for meals-break and a 10 minutes recess for
rest. During a week, his card showed that his time was chargeable to :

                    Job X                          15 hrs.

                    Job Y                          12 hrs.

                    Job Z                          13 hrs.

The time not booked was wasted while waiting for a job. In Cost Accounting, STATE
how would you allocate the wages of the workers for the week?

SOLUTION

Working notes:
(i) Total effective hours in a week:

     [(8 hrs. ­ (30 mts. + 10 mts.)] × 6 days = 44 hours
(ii) Total wages for a week:

     (` 100 + 120% of ` 100) × 6 days = ` 1,320
(iii) Wage rate per hour = 1320 ÷ 44 hours = ` 30
(iv) Time wasted waiting for job (Abnormal idle time):

     = 44 hrs. ­ (15 hrs. + 12 hrs. + 13 hrs.) = 4 hrs.
Allocation of wages in Cost Accounting

                                                                      (`)

Allocated to Job X                                 : 15 hours × ` 30  450

Allocated to Job Y                                 : 12 hours × ` 30    360
Allocated to Job Z                                 : 13 hours × ` 30    390
Charged to Costing Profit & Loss A/c               : 4 hours × ` 30     120
Total                                                                 1,320

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.173.17

     6. OVERTIME

Work done beyond normal working hours is known as `overtime work'.
Overtime payment is the amount of wages paid for working beyond normal working
hours. Overtime payment consist of two elements- (i) Normal wages for overtime work
and (ii) Premium payment for overtime work.

       Overtime Payment = Wages paid for overtime at normal rate + Premium
                                     (extra) payment for overtime work

Overtime premium: The rate for overtime work is higher than the normal time rate;
usually it is at double the normal rates. The extra amount so paid over the normal rate
is called overtime premium.

Rate and conditions for overtime premium may either be fixed by an entity itself or it
may be required by any statute in force. The overtime premium should not be less
than the premium calculated as per the statute.

As per the Factories Act 1948 "Where a worker works in a factory for more than
nine hours in any day or for more than fourty eight hours in any week, he shall, in
respect of overtime work, be entitled to wages at the rate of twice his ordinary rate
of wages."

Where any workers in a factory are paid on a piece-rate basis, the time rate shall
be deemed to be equivalent to the daily average of their full-time earnings for the
days on which they actually worked on the same or identical job during the month
immediately preceding the calendar month during which the overtime work was
done, and such time rates shall be deemed to be the ordinary rates of wages of
those workers

Ordinary rate of wages means the basic wages plus such allowances, including the
cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional sale to workers
of food grains and other articles, as the worker is for the time being entitled to, but
does not include a bonus and wages for overtime work.

Occasional overtime is a healthy sign as it indicates that the firm has the optimum
capacity and that the capacity is being fully utilised. But persistent overtime is rather a
bad sign because it may indicate either (a) that the firm needs larger capacity in men
and machines, or (b) that men have got into the habit of postponing their ordinary

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        3.18             COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

work towards the evening so that they can earn extra money in the form of overtime
wages.

Causes of Overtime and Treatment of Overtime premium in cost accounting

        Causes                                           Treatment

(1) The customer may agree to (1) If overtime is resorted to at the

bear the entire charge of                          desire of the customer, then

overtime because urgency of                        overtime premium may be

work.                                              charged to the job directly.

(2) Overtime may be called for to (2) If overtime is required to cope

make up any shortfall in                           with  general       production

production due to some                             programmes or for meeting

unexpected development.                            urgent orders, the overtime

                                                   premium should be treated as

                                                   overhead cost of the particular

                                                   department or cost centre which

                                                   works overtime.

(3) Overtime work may be (3) If overtime is worked in a

necessary to make up a                             department due to the fault of

shortfall in production due to                     another department, the overtime

some fault of management.                          premium should be charged to the

                                                   latter department.

(4) Overtime work may be resorted (4) Overtime worked on account of

to, to secure an out-turn in                       abnormal conditions such as

excess of the normal output to                     flood, earthquake etc., should not

take advantage of an                               be charged to cost, but to Costing

expanding market or of rising                      Profit and Loss Account.

demand

ILLUSTRATION 3

CALCULATE the earnings of A and B from the following particulars for a month and
allocate the employee cost to each job X, Y and Z:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                 3.193.19

                                                                            A  B

(i) Basic Wages (`)                                               10,000 16,000

(ii) Dearness Allowance                                           50% 50%

(iii) Contribution to provident Fund (on basic wages)             8% 8%

(iv) Contribution to Employee's State Insurance (on basic wages)  2% 2%

(v) Overtime (Hours)                                              10           --

The normal working hours for the month are 200. Overtime is paid at double the
total of normal wages and dearness allowance. Employer's contribution to state
Insurance and Provident Fund are at equal rates with employees' contributions.
The two workers were employed on jobs X, Y and Z in the following proportions:

Jobs                         X                     Y              Z

Worker A                     40%                   30%            30%

Worker B                     50%                   20%            30%

Overtime was done on job Y.

SOLUTION

Statement showing Earnings of Workers A and B

Basic wages                                               A (`)     B (`)
Dearness Allowance (50% of Basic Wages)                 10,000    16,000
Overtime wages (Refer to Working Note 1)
Gross wages earned                                        5,000     8,000
Less: Contribution to Provident fund                      1,500         --
Less: Contribution to ESI                               16,500
Net wages earned                                          (800)   24,000
                                                          (200)   (1,280)
                                                        15,500
                                                                    (320)
                                                                  22,400

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.20                          COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Statement of Employee Cost:

                                                                          A (`)         B (`)

Gross Wages (excluding overtime)                                         15,000         24,000

Add: Employer's contribution to PF                                        800           1,280

Add: Employer's contribution to ESI                                       200           320

Gross wages earned                                                       16,000         25,600

Normal working hours                                                      200           200

Ordinary wages rate per hour                                                  80        128

Statement Showing Allocation of Wages to Jobs

                                 Total                        X (`)       Jobs          Z (`)
                              Wages (`)                                   Y (`)

Worker A:                                          16,000        6,400        4,800     4,800
- Ordinary Wages (4: 3 : 3)                         1,500            --       1,500         --
- Overtime
Worker B:                                          25,600     12,800 5,120                7,680
- Ordinary Wages (5 : 2 : 3)                       43,100     19,200 11,420             12,480

Working Notes

1. Normal Wages are considered as basic wages

Over time =           2×(Basic wage +DA)×10 hours

                                        200

               =      2×      `15, 000             ×10 hours  =  `150  ×  10  hours  =  `1,500
                                200

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                        3.213.21

ILLUSTRATION 4

It is seen from the job card for repair of the customer's equipment that a total of 154
labour hours have been put in as detailed below:

                   Worker `A' paid Worker `B' paid Worker `C' paid

                   at ` 200 per day at ` 100 per at ` 300 per day

                   of 8 hours                      day of 8 hours of 8 hours

Monday (hours)     10.5                            8.0   10.5

Tuesday (hours)    8.0                             8.0   8.0

Wednesday (hours)  10.5                            8.0   10.5

Thursday (hours)   9.5                             8.0   9.5

Friday (hours)     10.5                            8.0   10.5

Saturday (hours)   --                              8.0   8.0

Total (hours)      49.0                            48.0  57.0

In terms of an award in employee conciliation, the workers are to be paid dearness allowance
on the basis of cost of living index figures relating to each month which works out @ ` 968
for the relevant month. The dearness allowance is payable to all workers irrespective of
wages rate if they are present or are on leave with wages on all working days.

Each worker has to work for 8 hours on weekdays. Saturday and Sunday will be weekly
holiday, however workers may work on Saturdays due to exigency of work for 4 hours,
though full payment of 8 hours will be made with no other payments.

Overtime is paid twice of ordinary wage rate if a worker works for more than nine
hours in a day. Excluding holidays, the total number of hours works out to 176 in the
relevant month. The company's contribution to Provident Fund and Employees State
Insurance Premium are absorbed into overheads.

CALCULATE the wages payable to each worker.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.22          COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

SOLUTION
(1) Calculation of hours to be paid for worker A:

           Normal Extra                            Overtime  Equivalent normal    Total
            hours hours                              hours         hours for     normal
                                                                                  hours
                                                             overtime worked

Monday          8       1                          1½        3                   12

Tuesday         8       --                         --        --                  8

Wednesday       8       1                          1½        3                   12

Thursday        8       1                          ½         1                   10

Friday          8       1                          1½        3                   12

Saturday        --      --                         --        --                  --

Total           40      4                          5         10                  54

Calculation of hours to be paid for worker B:

                Normal  Extra                      Overtime  Equivalent normal    Total
                 hours  hours                        hours   hours for overtime  normal
                                                                                  hours
                                                                     worked
                                                                                     8
Monday          8       ---                        ---       ---                     8
                                                                                     8
Tuesday         8       ---                        ---       ---                     8
                                                                                     8
Wednesday       8       ---                        ---       ---                     8
                                                                                    48
Thursday        8       ---                        ---       ---

Friday          8       ---                        ---       ---

Saturday        4       4*                         ---       ---

Total           44      4                          ---       ---

(*Worker-B has not worked more than 9 hours in any day)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                          3.233.23

Calculation of hours to be paid for worker C:

                Normal  Extra                      Overtime  Equivalent normal        Total
                 hours  hours                        hours   hours for overtime      normal
                                                                                      hours
                                                                     worked

Monday          8       1                          1½                 3              12

Tuesday         8       ---                        ---                ---            8

Wednesday       8       1                          1½                 3              12

Thursday        8       1                          ½                  1              10

Friday          8       1                          1½                 3              12

Saturday        8*      ---                        ---                ---            8

Total           48      4                          5                  10             62

(*Worker-C will be paid for equivalent 8 hours, though 4 hours of working is
required on Saturday. Further, no overtime will be paid for working beyond 4
hours since it is paid for working beyond 9 hours.)

Wages payable:

                                                                   A       B             C

Basic Wages per hour (`)                                    25.00          12.50     37.50
Dearness allowance per hour (`)                               5.50
Hourly rate (`)                                                            5.50      5.50
Total normal hours                                          30.50
Total Wages payable (`)                                     54.00          18.00     43.00
                                                        1,647.00
                                                                           48.00     62.00

                                                                           864.00 2,666.00

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.24        COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

ILLUSTRATION 5
In a factory, the basic wage rate is `100 per hour and overtime rates are as follows:

Before and after normal working hours                      175% of basic wage rate

Sundays and holidays                                       225% of basic wage rate

During the previous year, the following hours were worked

- Normal time                                              1,00,000 hours

- Overtime before and after working hours                         20,000 hours

Overtime on Sundays and holidays                                     5,000 hours

 Total                                                     1,25,000 hours
The following hours have been worked on job `Z'

Normal                                                            1,000 hours

Overtime before and after working hrs.                               100 hours.

Sundays and holidays                                                 25 hours.

Total                                                             1,125 hours

You are required to CALCULATE the labour cost chargeable to job `Z' and overhead in
each of the following instances:

(a) Where overtime is worked regularly throughout the year as a policy due to the
       workers' shortage.

(b) Where overtime is worked irregularly to meet the requirements of production.
(c) Where overtime is worked at the request of the customer to expedite the job.

SOLUTION

Workings

Basic wage rate                                    : ` 100 per hour

Overtime wage rate before and after working hours : ` 100 × 175%

                                                   = ` 175 per hour

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.253.25

Overtime wage rate for Sundays and holidays        : ` 100 × 225%

                                                   = ` 225 per hour

Computation of average inflated wage rate (including overtime premium):

Particulars                                                          (`)

Annual wages for the previous year for normal time                 1,00,00,000
(1,00,000 hrs. × `100)

Wages for overtime before and after working hours                    35,00,000
(20,000 hrs. × `175)

Wages for overtime on Sundays and holidays                           11,25,000
(5,000 hrs. × `225)

Total wages for 1,25,000 hrs.                                      1,46,25,000

Average inflated wage rate = `1, 46,25,000 = `117
                                            1,25,000 hours

(a) Where overtime is worked regularly as a policy due to workers' shortage:

     The overtime premium is treated as a part of employee cost and job is charged
     at an inflated wage rate. Hence, employee cost chargeable to job Z

     = Total hours × Inflated wage rate = 1,125 hrs. × ` 117 = ` 1,31,625

(b) Where overtime is worked irregularly to meet the requirements of
     production:

     Basic wage rate is charged to the job and overtime premium is charged to
     factory overheads as under:

      Employee cost chargeable to Job Z: 1,125 hours @ `100 per hour =
      ` 1,12,500

      Factory overhead: {100 hrs. × ` (175 ­ 100)} + {25 hrs. × ` (225 ­ 100)} =
      {`7,500 + `3,125} = `10,625

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.26                 COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(c) Where overtime is worked at the request of the customer, overtime premium
     is also charged to the job as under:

                                                      (`)

Job Z Employee cost  1,125 hrs. @ ` 100            = 1,12,500
Overtime premium     100 hrs. @ ` (175 ­ 100)
                     25 hrs. @ ` (225 ­ 100)       =  7,500
                     Total
                                                   =  3,125

                                                      1,23,125

7. LABOUR UTILISATION

For identifying utilisation of labour a statement is prepared (generally weekly) for
each department / cost centre. This statement should show the actual time paid
for, the standard time (including normal idle time) allowed for production and the
abnormal idle time analysed for causes thereof.

7.1 Identification of Utilisation of labours with Cost
      Centres

For the identification of utilisation of labour with the cost centre, a wage analysis
sheet is prepared. Wage analysis sheet is a statement in which total wages paid
are analysed according to cost centre, jobs, work orders etc. The data for analysis is
provided by wage sheet, time card, piece work cards and job cards.

The preparation of such sheet serves the following purposes:

(i) It analyse the labour time into direct and indirect labour by cost centres,
       jobs, work orders.

(ii) It provides details of direct labour cost comprises of wages, overtime to be
       charged as production cost of cost centre, jobs or work orders.

(iii) It provides information for treatment of indirect labour cost as overhead
       expenses.

7.2 Identification of labour hours with work order or
      batches or capital job

For identification of labour hours with work order or batches or capital jobs or
overhead work orders the following points are to be noted:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.273.27

(i) The direct labour hours can be identified with the particular work order or
       batches or capital job or overhead work orders on the basis of details
       recorded on source document such as time sheet or job cards.

(ii) The indirect labour hours cannot be directly identified with the particular
       work order or batches or capital jobs or overhead work orders. Therefore,
       they are traced to cost centre and then assigned to work order or batches
       or capital jobs or overhead work orders by using overhead absorption rate.

     8. SYSTEMS OF WAGE PAYMENT ANDSystem of Wages
          INCENTIVESPayment

There exist several systems of employee wage payment and incentives, which can
be classified under the following heads:

                                                        Time based
                                                      Output based
                                      Combination of time and output based
                                                Premium Bonus method
                                                  Group Bonus scheme

                                            Incentives for indirect workers

8.1 Time Based (Time Rate System)

Straight Time Rate System: Under this system, the workers are paid on time
basis i.e. hour, day, week, or month. The amount of wages due to a worker are
arrived at by multiplying the time worked (including normal idle period) by rate for
the time.

Time based wages payment is suitable for the employees (i) whose services
cannot be directly or tangibly measured, e.g., general helpers, supervisory and
clerical staff etc. (ii) engaged in highly skilled jobs, (iii) where the pace of output is
independent of the operator, e.g., automatic chemical plants.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.28  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Wages under time rate system is calculated as under:
            Wages = Time Worked (Hours/ Days/ Months) × Rate for the time

8.2 Output Based (Piece Rate System)

Straight Piece Rate System: Under this system, each operation, job or unit of
production is termed a piece. A rate of payment, known as the piece rate or piece
work rate is fixed for each piece. The wages of the worker depend upon his
output and rate of each unit of output; it is in fact independent of the time taken
by him. The wages paid to a worker are calculated as:

                      Wages = Number of units produced × Rate per unit

8.3 Premium Bonus Method

Under these methods, standard time is established for performing a job. The
worker is guaranteed his daily wages (except in Barth System), if his output is
below and upto standard. In case the task is completed in less than the standard
time, the saved time is shared between the employee and the employer.

(i) Halsey Premium Plan: Under Halsey premium plan a standard time is fixed
       for each job or process. If there is no saving on this standard time allowance,
       the worker is paid only his day rate. He gets his time rate even if he exceeds
       the standard time limit, since his day rate is guaranteed.

       If, however, he does the job in less than the standard time, he gets a bonus
       equal to 50 percent of the wages of time saved; the employer benefits by
       the other 50 percent. The scheme also is sometimes referred to as the Halsey
       fifty percent plan. Earnings under Halsey Premium plan is calculated as
       under:

               Wages = Time taken × Time rate + 50% of time saved × Time rate

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                           3.293.29

Advantages and Disadvantages of Halsey Premium Plan

                Advantages                               Disadvantages

1. Time rate is guaranteed while 1. Incentive is not so strong as

there is opportunity for increasing                with piece rate system. In fact

earnings        by          increasing             the harder the worker works,

production.                                        the lesser he gets per piece.

2. The system is equitable in as 2. The sharing principle may not

much as the employer gets a                        be liked by employees.

direct return for his efforts in

improving production methods

and providing better equipment.

ILLUSTRATION 6

CALCULATE the earnings of a worker under Halsey System. The relevant data is as
below:

Time Rate (per hour)                               ` 60

Time allowed                                       8 hours

Time taken                                         6 hours

Time saved                                         2 hours

SOLUTION

Calculation of total earnings:

= Time taken × Time rate + 50% (Time Allowed ­ Time Taken) × Time rate

= 6 hrs. × `60 + 1/2 × (2 hrs. × `60) or `360 + `60 = `420

Of his total earnings, `360 is on account of the time worked and `60 is on
account of his share of the premium bonus.

(ii) Rowan Premium Plan: According to this system a standard time allowance
       is fixed for the performance of a job and bonus is paid if time is saved.

Under Rowan System the bonus is that proportion of the time wages as
time saved bears to the standard time.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.30          COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Time taken × Rate per hour + Time Saved × Time taken × Rate per hour
                                           Time Allowed

Advantages and Disadvantages of Rowan Premium Plan

                Advantages                                   Disadvantages

1. It is claimed to be a fool-proof 1. The system is a bit

          system in as much as a worker can                  complicated.

          never double his earnings even if

          there is bad rate setting.

2. It is admirably suitable for 2. The incentive is weak at a

          encouraging moderately efficient                   high production level where

          workers as it provides a better                    the time saved is more than

          return for moderate efficiency than                50% of the time allowed.

          under the Halsey Plan.

3. The sharing principle appeals to 3. The sharing principle is not

          the employer as being equitable.                   generally welcomed by

                                                             employees.

ILLUSTRATION 7

CALCULATE the earnings of a worker under Rowan System. The relevant data is
given as below:

          Time rate (per Hour)                     ` 60

          Time allowed                             8 hours.

          Time taken                               6 hours.

          Time saved                               2 hours.

SOLUTION

Calculation of total earnings:
=Time taken × Rate per hour + Time Saved × Time taken × Rate per hour

                                              Time Allowed
= 6 hours × `60 + 2 hours × 6 hours × ` 60 = ` 360 + ` 90 = ` 450

                           8 hours

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.313.31

ILLUSTRATION 8

       Two workmen, `A' and `B', produce the same product using the same material.
       Their normal wage rate is also the same. `A' is paid bonus according to the
       Rowan system, while `B' is paid bonus according to the Halsey system. The
       time allowed to make the product is 50 hours. `A' takes 30 hours while `B'
       takes 40 hours to complete the product. The factory overhead rate is ` 5 per
       man-hour actually worked. The factory cost for the product for `A' is ` 3,490
       and for `B' it is ` 3,600.

       Required:

       (a) COMPUTE the normal rate of wages;

       (b) COMPUTE the cost of materials cost;

       (c) PREPARE a statement comparing the factory cost of the products as made
               by the two workmen.

SOLUTION

       Step 1 : Let X be the cost of material and Y be the normal rate of wages per
                   hour.

       Step 2 : Factory Cost of Workman `A'

                                                             (`)

A. Material Cost                                             X

B. Wages (Rowan Plan)                                        30 Y

C. Bonus = 30 × (50 - 30) × Y                                12 Y

50

D. Overheads (30 × `5)                                       150

E. Factory Cost                                              3,490

Or, X + 42 Y = `3,490 (Given) ­ `150 = `3,340...........................equation (i)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.32                    COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Step 3 : Factory Cost of Workman `B'

                                                               (`)

A. Material Cost                                               X

B. Wages (Halsey Plan)                                         40 Y

C. Bonus = 50% of (SH - AH) × R                                5Y

       = 50% of (50 - 40) × R

D. Overheads (40 × `5)                                         200

E. Factory Cost                                                3,600

Or, X + 45 Y = `3,600 (Given) ­ `200 = `3,400................equation (ii)

Step 4 : Subtracting equation (i) from equation (ii)

3Y = `60

Y = `60/3 = `20 per hour.

(a) The normal rate of wages: `20 per hour

(b) The cost of material: X + 45 × ` 20 = ` 3,400 or, X = ` 3,400 ­ ` 900 =
       ` 2,500

(c) Comparative Statement of the Factory Cost of the product made by
       the two workmen.

                                                      `A' (`)  `B' (`)

Material cost                                         2,500    2,500

Direct Wages                                          600      800

                                                   (30 × `20) (40 × `20)

Bonus                                                 240      100

                                                   (12 × `20)  (5 × `20)

Factory Overhead                                      150      200

Factory Cost                                          3,490    3,600

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                           3.333.33

ILLUSTRATION 9

(a) Bonus paid under the Halsey Plan with bonus at 50% for the time saved
       equals the bonus paid under the Rowan System. When will this statement
       hold good? (Your answer should contain the proof).

(b) The time allowed for a job is 8 hours. The hourly rate is ` 8. PREPARE a statement
       showing:

          (i) The bonus earned

          (ii) The total earnings of employee and

          (iii) Hourly earnings.

Under the Halsey System with 50% bonus for time saved and Rowan System for
each hour saved progressively.

SOLUTION

(a) Bonus under Halsey Plan = 50 × (SH - AH) × R                      (i)
                                                       100

          Bonus under Rowan Plan : = AH × (SH - AH) × R               (ii)
                                                       SH

          Bonus under Halsey Plan will be equal to the bonus under Rowan Plan
          when the following condition holds good:

          50 × (SH - AH) × R = AH × (SH - AH) × R
          100                                      SH

          50 = AH
          100 SH

          Hence, when the actual time taken (AH) is 50% of the time allowed
          (SH), the bonus under Halsey and Rowan Plans is equal.

(b) Statement of Bonus, total earnings of Employee and hourly earnings
       under Halsey and Rowan Systems.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.34          COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

SH AH Time Basic Bonus Bonus Total Total Hourly Hourly

          saved wages under under Earnings Earnings Earnings Earnings

                   (AH x`8) Halsey Rowan under under under under

                   (B x `8) System system Halsey Rowan Halsey Rowan

                         50                         B        System System System  System
                        100 × C × 8  A × C × 8 D+E                                   H/B
                                                                 D+F  G/B

A  B      C=       D         E                         F    G    H    I            J

Hours Hours (A-B)  (`)       (`)                       (`)  (`)  (`)  (`)          (`)

          Hours

8  8      -        64        -                         -    64   64   8.00         8.00

8  7      1        56        4                         7    60   63   8.57         9.00

8  6      2        48        8                         12   56   60   9.33 10.00

8  5      3        40        12                        15   52   55   10.40 11.00

8  4      4        32        16                        16   48   48   12.00 12.00

8  3      5        24        20                        15   44   39   14.67 13.00

8  2      6        16        24                        12   40   28   20.00 14.00

8  1      7        8         28                        7    36   15   36.00 15.00

ILLUSTRATION 10

   A skilled worker in XYZ Ltd. is paid a guaranteed wage rate of ` 30 per hour. The
   standard time per unit for a particular product is 4 hours. Mr. P, a machine man, has
   been paid wages under the Rowan Incentive Plan and he had earned an effective
   hourly rate of ` 37.50 on the manufacture of that particular product.

   STATE what could have been his total earnings and effective hourly rate, had he
   been put on Halsey Incentive Scheme (50%)?

SOLUTION

   Total earnings (under 50% Halsey Scheme) = Hours worked × Rate per hour +
                                                            ½ × time saved × Rate per hour

                                                          = 3 hours × ` 30 + ½ × 1 hour × `30
                                                             = `105

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                         3.353.35

Effective hourly rate                              = Total earnings = ` 105 = `35
                                                        Hours taken 3 hours

Working Note:

Let T hours be the total time worked in hours by the skilled workers (machine
man P), `30 is the rate per hour; standard time is 4 hours per unit and effective
hourly earnings rate is `37.50 then

Earning (under Rowan plan) =                       Hours worked  ×  Rate  per hr +   Time saved   ×
                                                                                    Time allowed

`37.5 T                         Time taken × Rate per hr
                               = T × `30 + (4 - T) × T × `30

                                                   4

(both sides are divided by T)

` 37.5                 = ` 30 + (4 ­ T) × ` 7.5

` 37.5                 = ` 30 + `30 - 7.5T

or, ` 7.5 T            = `60-`37.5

or, ` 7.5 T            = ` 22.5

or, T                  = 3 hours.

ILLUSTRATION 11

A factory having the latest sophisticated machines wants to introduce an incentive
scheme for its workers, keeping in view the following:

(i) The entire gains of improved production should not go to the workers.

(ii) In the name of speed, quality should not suffer.

(iii) The rate setting department being newly established are liable to commit
       mistakes.

You are required to PREPARE a suitable incentive scheme and DEMONSTRATE by an
illustrative numerical example how your scheme answers to all the requirements of
the management.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.36           COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

SOLUTION

Rowan Scheme of premium bonus (variable sharing plan) is a suitable incentive
scheme for the workers of the factory. If this scheme is adopted, the entire
gains due to time saved by a worker will not pass to him.

Another feature of this scheme is that a worker cannot increase his earnings or
bonus by merely increasing its work speed. The reason for this is that the bonus
under Rowan Scheme is maximum when the time taken by a worker on a job is

half of the time allowed. As this fact is known to the workers, therefore, they
work at such a speed which helps them to maintain the quality of output too.

Lastly, Rowan System provides a safeguard in the case of any loose fixation of the
standards by the rate-setting department. It may be observed from the following
illustration that in the Rowan Scheme the bonus paid will be low due to any loose
fixation of standards. Workers cannot take undue advantage of such a situation.
The above three features of Rowan Plan can be discussed with the help of the
following illustration:

(i) Time allowed =                                 4 hours

          Time taken  =                            3 hours

          Time saved  =                            1 hour

          Rate        =                            `5 per hour

          Bonus       =                            TTimimeeatllaokweend× Time saved × Rate

                      =                            3  hours  ×  1  hour  ×  `5  =  `3.75
                                                   4  hours

          In the above illustration time saved is 1 hour and, therefore, total gain is
          ` 5. Out of `5 according to Rowan Plan only ` 3.75 is given to the worker
          in the form of bonus and the remaining ` 1.25 remains with the
          management. In other words, a worker is entitled for 75 percent of the
          time saved in the form of bonus.

(ii) The figures of bonus in the above illustration when the time taken is 2
       hours and 1 hour respectively are as below:

          Bonus       =   Time taken                         ×  Time  saved     ×  Rate
                         Time allowed

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                                3.373.37

       =  2  hhoouurrss×                              2  hours  ×  `5  =  `5
          4

       =  1  hours                                 ×  3  hours  ×  `5  =  `3.75
          4  hours

The above figures of bonus clearly show that when time taken is half of
the time allowed, the bonus is maximum. When the time taken is reduced
from 2 to 1 hour, the bonus figure fell by `1.25. Hence, it is quite
apparent to workers that it is of no use to increase speed of work. This
feature of Rowan Plan thus protects the quality of output.

(iii) If the rate-setting department erroneously sets the time allowed as 10 hours
       instead of 4 hours, in the above illustration; then the bonus paid will be as
       follows:

Bonus  = 130hhoouurrss× 7 hours × `5 = `10.50

The bonus paid for saving 7 hours thus is `10.50 which is approximately equal
to the wages of 2 hours. In other words, the bonus paid to the workers is low.
Hence workers cannot take undue advantage of any mistake committed by the
time setting department of the concern.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.38  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

     9. ABSORPTION OF WAGES

9.1 Elements of Wages

In common parlance, the term `wages' represents monetary payment which an
employee receives at regular intervals for the services rendered. Strictly speaking,
however, from the point of view of the employer and the cost to the industry,
wages should be taken to include also non-monetary benefits which an employee
receives by virtue of employment. Such non-monetary benefits may include:
(i) Medical facilities;
(ii) Educational and training facilities;
(iii) Recreational and sports facilities;
(iv) Housing and social welfare; and
(v) Cost of subsidised canteen and co-operative societies.
Such benefits are generally given in an industrial establishment. In some cases,
the provision of benefits is compulsory. Therefore, while computing the wage cost
per worker, the monetary value of such non-monetary benefits should also be
taken into account.
The monetary part of a worker's remuneration includes the basic wages, dearness
allowance, overtime wages, other special allowance, if any, production bonus,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.393.39

employer's contribution to the provident fund, Employees State Insurance scheme
premium, contribution to pension fund, leave pay, etc.

The basic wage is the payment for work done, measured in terms of hours
attended or the units produced, as the case may be. The basic wage rate is not
normally altered unless there is a fundamental change in the working conditions
or methods of manufacture.

Dearness allowance is an allowance provided to cover the increase in cost of
living from one period to another. This allowance is calculated either as
percentage of the basic wage or as a fixed amount for the days worked. In either
case, the percentage or the fixed amount is subject to revision whenever the cost
of living index or consumer price Index rises or falls by a certain figure as agreed
to by the employer with the Employee union. When permanent rise in the cost of
living index occurs, a part of the dearness allowance is often absorbed in the
basic wage.

Overtime allowance is an allowance paid for the extra hours worked at the rates
laid down in the Factories Act. In certain industries, where special allowance for
the working conditions, tool maintenance, etc., are paid they are also considered
as part of wages.

Production Bonus is an incentive payment made to workers for efficiency that
results in production above the standard. There are different methods of
computing incentives. Under the Payment of Bonus Act, a worker is entitled to
compulsory bonus of 8.33% wages earned in the relevant year or `100 (whichever
is greater). The bonus may be upto 20% of wages depending upon the quantum
of profits calculated as per the Act.

9.2 Component of Wages Cost or Wages for Costing
      Purposes

In addition to wages (including allowances, such as D.A.) that are paid to workers,
a firm may have to spend on many other items (such as premium to the ESI or
provident fund or bonus).

Further, the worker does not spend all the time for which he is paid on productive
work.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.40  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

This is because he is entitled to weekly holiday and various type of leave. There is
also a certain amount of unavoidable idle time. The question is to what extent
such additional payment or cost in respect of Employee can be charged directly
to unit of cost as part of direct Employee cost? Of course, in the case of indirect
Employee, all such payments as also the wages paid to them, must be treated as
part of overheads.

But in the case of direct workers, two alternatives are possible. The additional
charges may be treated as overheads. Alternatively, the wage rates being charged
to job may be computed by including such payments; automatically then, such
payments will be charged to the work done along with wages of the worker. (It
should be remembered that such wage rate will be only for costing purposes and
not for payment to workers). The total of wages and additional payment should
be divided by effective hours of work to get such wage rates for costing purposes.

ILLUSTRATION 12

A worker is paid `10,000 per month and a dearness allowance of `2,000 p.m.
Worker contribution to provident fund is @ 10% and employer also contributes the
same amount as the employee. The Employees State Insurance Corporation
premium is 6.5% of wages of which 1.75% is paid by the employees. It is the firm's
practice to pay 2 months' wages as bonus each year.

The number of working days in a year are 300 of 8 hours each. Out of these the worker is
entitled to 15 days leave on full pay. CALCULATE the wage rate per hour for costing
purposes.

SOLUTION

Wages paid to worker during the year {(` 10,000 +2,000) × 12}         (`)
Add: Employer Contribution to:                                 1,44,000
Provident Fund @ 10%
E.S.I. Premium @ 4.75% (6.5 ­ 1.75)                              14,400
Bonus at 2 months' wages (Basic + DA)                             6,840
Total
                                                                 24,000
                                                               1,89,240

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                 3.413.41

Effective hours per year: 285 days × 8 hours = 2,280 hours
Wage-rate per hour (for costing purpose): `1,89,240/2,280 hours = `83

9.3 Holiday and Leave Wages

One alternative to account for wages paid on account of paid holiday and leave
can be to include them as departmental overheads. In such a case, it is necessary
to record such wages separately from "worked for wages". Such a segregation can
be made possible by providing a separate column in the payroll for holiday and
leave wages in the same way as there are columns for dearness allowance,
provident fund deductions, etc. If, however, a separate or additional column
cannot be provided for this purpose it would be necessary to analyse the payroll
periodically to ascertain how much of the total payment pertains to "worked for
wages" and how much is attributed to leave and holiday wages.

Another way could be to inflate the wage rate for costing purposes to include
holiday and leave wages. This can be done only in the case of direct workers.

ILLUSTRATION 13

CALCULATE the Employee hour rate of a worker X from the following data:

Basic pay                                          ` 10,000 p.m.

D.A.                                               ` 3,000 p.m.

Fringe benefits                                    ` 1,000 p.m.

Number of working days in a year 300. 20 days are availed off as holidays on full pay
in a year. Assume a day of 8 hours.

SOLUTION

(i) Effective working days in a year                                         300
       Less: Leave days on full pay                                            20
       Effective working days
       Total effective working hours (280 days × 8 hours)              280 days
                                                                           2,240

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.42  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(ii) Total wages paid in a year                           (`)
       Basic pay                                   1,20,000
       D.A.
       Fringe benefits                               36,000
       Total wages                                   12,000
                                                   1,68,000
(iii) Hourly rate : `1,68,000/2,240 hours            `75.00

9.4 Night Shift Allowance

In some cases, workers get extra payment if they work at night. Since the extra
payment is not for any particular job, therefore such a payment should be treated
as part of overheads.

9.5 Absorption Rates of Employee Cost

Employee cost as stated above include monetary compensation and non-monetary
benefits to workers.

Monetary benefits include, basic wages, D.A., overtime pay, incentive or
production bonus contribution to employee provident fund, House Rent
Allowance, Holiday and vacation pay etc.

The non-monetary benefits include medical facilities, subsidized canteen services,
subsidized housing, education and training facilities.

Accounting of monetary and non-monetary benefits to indirect workers does not
pose any problems because the total of monetary and non-monetary benefits are
treated as overhead and absorbed on the basis of rate per direct employee hour,
if overheads are predominantly employee oriented.

For direct workers, the ideal method is to charge jobs or units produced by
supplying per hour rate calculated as below:

Rate per hour = Total estimated monetary benefits and cost of non monetary benefits

                                        Budgeted direct employee hour -Normal idle time

Another alternative method is to treat the monetary benefits other than basic
wages and dearness allowance as well as cost of non-monetary benefits as
overheads.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                  3.433.43

10. EFFICIENCY RATING PROCEDURES

Efficiency is usually related with performance and may be computed by
comparing the time taken with the standard time allotted to perform the given
job/task.

If the time taken by a worker on a job equals or less than the standard time,
then he is rated efficient.

In case he takes more time than the standard time he is rated as inefficient.

Efficiency  in % =  Time                           allowed as per  standard ×100
                                                       Time Taken

For efficiency rating of employees the following procedures may be followed:

1. Determining standard time/performance standards: The first step is to
       determine the standard time taken by a worker for performing a particular
       job/task. The standard time can be determined by using Time & Motion study
       or Work study techniques. While determining the standard time for a
       job/task a heterogeneous group of workers is taken and contingency
       allowances are added for determining standard time.

2. Measuring Actual Performance of workers: For computing efficiency
       rating it is necessary to develop a procedure for recording the actual
       performance of workers. The system developed should record the output of
       each worker along with the time taken by him.

3. Computation of efficiency rating: The efficiency rating of each worker can
       be computed by using the above mentioned Formula.

10.1 Need for Efficiency Rating

1. As discussed earlier when a firm follows a system of payment by results, the
       payment has a direct relationship with the output given by a worker. The
       firm for making payment to worker is required to ascertain his efficiency
       level.

2. The efficiency rating also helps the management in preparing employee
       requirement budget or for preparing manpower requirements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.44              COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Example - 1: P Ltd. manufactures two products by using one grade of
employees. The following estimates are available:

Budgeted production (units)                                        Product- A             Product- B
Standard hours allowed per product
                                                                       3,480                   4,000
                                                                          5                       4

It is further worked out that the efficiency rating (efficiency ratio) for productive
hours worked by direct workers in actually manufacturing the production is
80% then the exact standard employee-hours requirement can be worked out
as follows:

                                                   Product- A      Product- B                  Total

Budgeted        production                         3,480                          4,000
(units)

Standard hours allowed                             17,400                         16,000       33,400

for budgeted production (3,480 units × 5 hours) (4,000 units × 4 hours)

Since efficiency ratio is given as 80% therefore standard employee hours

required  for  100%  efficiency  level             is    33,  400  hours×100        =  41,750  hours.
                                                                              80  

Employee Productivity: Productivity is generally determined by the input/output
ratio. In case of employees, it is calculated as below:

                                 Standard timefor doing actual work
                                              Actual timetaken

Employee productivity is used for measuring the efficiency of individual workers.
It is an index of efficiency in the utilisation of human resources, materials, capital,
power and all kinds of services and facilities.

It is measured by the output in relation to input. Productivity can be improved by
reducing the input for a certain quantity or value of output or by increasing the
output from the same given quantity or value of input.

Factors for increasing Employee Productivity: The important factors which
must be taken into consideration for increasing employee productivity are as
follows:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.453.45

1. Employing only those workers who possess the right type of skill.

2. Placing a right type of person to a right job.

3. Training young and old workers by providing them the right types of opportunities.

4. Taking appropriate measures to avoid the situation of excess or shortage of
       employees.

5. Carrying out work study for fixation of wages and for the simplification and
       standardisation of work.

     11. EMPLOYEE (LABOUR) TURNOVER

11.1 Employee (Labour) Turnover

Employee turnover or labour turnover in an organisation is the rate of
change in the composition of employee force during a specified period
measured against a suitable index.

The standard of usual employee turnover in the industry or locality or the
employee turnover rate for a past period may be taken as the index or norm
against which actual turnover rate is compared.

There are three methods of calculating Employee turnover which are given below:

(i) Replacement Method: This method takes into consideration actual
       replacement of employees irrespective of number of persons leaving the
       organisation. Employee Turnover under this method is calculated as under:
                     Number of employees replaced during the period ×100
                Average number of employees during the period on roll

       New employees appointed on account of expansion plan of the
       organisation are not included in number of replacements.

(ii) Separation Method: In this method employee turnover is measured by
       dividing the total number of employees separated during the period by the
       average total number of employees on payroll during the same period.
       Employee Turnover under this method is calculated as under:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             3.46         COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

              Number of employees separated during               ptheeriopderoiondroll ×100
           Average number of employees during the

(iii) Flux Method: This method takes both the number of replacements as well
       as the number of separations during the period into account for calculation
       of employee turnover. Employee Turnover under this method is calculated as
       under:

           Number of employees                     +  Number of employees          
                                                                                   
             separated                                replaced during the period   

                                                                                    ×100

           Average number of employees during the period on roll

Employee turnover due to new recruitment: Generally, employees recruited on
account of expansion of an organisation, are not considered for calculation of
employee turnover. But it is considered that the newly recruited employees are
also responsible for changes in the composition or work force. Due to this
feature, some management accountants feel to take new recruitment for
calculating employee turnover. The total number of workers joining, including
replacements, is called accessions.

When number of accessions are considered for measuring employee turnover, the
employee turnover rate by Flux method may be computed by using any one of
the following expressions:

           No.of Separations+ No.of Replacements+No.of new Joinings ×100
                  Average no. of employees duringthe period on roll

                                                      Or

                      No. of Separations+No. of           Accessions  on      roll ×100
             Average no. of employees during              the period

Average number of employees during the period is calculated as follows:

=  No. of  employees  at  begining +No. of            employees  at  end  of  the  period
                                            2

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                 3.473.47

Equivalent Employee (Labour) Turnover rate:

If in the above computations, the data given is for a period other than a year, the
employee turnover rate so computed may be converted into equivalent annual
employee turnover rate by using the following formula:

                             Employee Turnover rate for the period×365
                                   Number of days in the period

ILLUSTRATION 14

The Accountant of Y Ltd. has computed employee turnover rates for the quarter ended
31st March, 2023 as 10%, 5% and 3% respectively under `Flux method', `Replacement
method' and `Separation method' respectively. If the number of workers replaced
during that quarter is 30, FIND OUT the number of workers for the quarter

(i) recruited and joined and (ii) left and discharged and (iii) Equivalent employee
turnover rates for the year.

SOLUTION

Working Note:
Average number of workers on roll (for the quarter):

Employee Turnover rate using Replacement method

                         =           No. of replacements                    roll ×100
                            Average number of workers on

Or,            5         =                              30

          100               Average number of workers on roll

Or,  Average number  of  workers on  roll =             30×100   = 600
                                                            5

(i) Number of workers recruited and joined:

     Employee turnover rate (Flux method)
     = No. of Separations * (S)+No. of Accessions(A)

               Average number of workers on roll

     Or,  10   =  18 *+A    Or,      A             =    6000  -  80  =  42
          100       600                                 100

     No. of workers recruited and joined 42.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   3.48  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(ii) Number of workers left and discharged:

Employee turnover rate (Separation method)

=          No. of Separations(S)                                × 100 =    3  =   S   Or, S* = 18
   Average number of workers on roll                                     100     600

Hence, number of workers left and discharged comes to 18

(iii) Calculation of Equivalent employee turnover rates:
     = Employee Turnover rate for the quarter(s)×4 quarters
                      Number of quarter(s)

Using Flux method                                  = 10% ×4 = 40%
Using Replacement method                                1
Using Separation method
                                                   =  5% ×4  =  20%
                                                       1

                                                   =  3% ×4  =  12%
                                                       1

11.2 Causes of Employee (Labour) Turnover

The reasons for employee turnover in an organisation can be classified under the
following three heads:
(a) Personal Causes;
(b) Unavoidable Causes; and
(c) Avoidable Causes.
(a) Personal causes: All the personal reasons which induce or compel an

       employee to leave his job; such causes include the following:
       (i) Change of jobs for betterment.
       (ii) Premature retirement due to ill health or old age.
       (iii) Domestic problems and family responsibilities.
       (iv) Discontent over the jobs and working environment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.493.49

       In all the above cases the employee leaves the organisation at his will and,
       therefore, it is difficult to suggest any possible remedy in the first three
       cases.

       But the last one can be overcome by creating conditions leading to a
       healthy working environment. For this, officers should play a positive role
       and make sure that their subordinates work under healthy working
       conditions.

(b) Unavoidable Causes: Unavoidable causes are those under which it
       becomes obligatory on the part of management to ask one or more of their
       employees to leave the organisation; such causes are summed up as listed
       below:

       (i) Seasonal nature of the business;

       (ii) Shortage of raw material, power, slack market for the product etc.;

       (iii) Change in the plant location;

       (iv) Disability, making a worker unfit for work;

       (v) Disciplinary measures;

(c) Avoidable Causes: Avoidable causes are those which require the attention
       of management on a continuous basis so as to keep employee turnover
       ratio as low as possible. The main causes under this case are indicated
       below:

       (i) Dissatisfaction with job, remuneration, hours of work, working conditions,
               etc.,

       (ii) Strained relationship with management, supervisors or fellow workers;

       (iii) Lack of training facilities and promotional avenues;

       (iv) Lack of recreational and medical facilities;

       (v) Low wages and allowances.

       Proper and timely management action can reduce the employee turnover
       appreciably so far as avoidable causes are concerned.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.50  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

11.3 Effects of Employee (Labour) Turnover

High employee turnover increases the cost of production in the following ways:

(i) Even flow of production is disturbed;

(ii) Efficiency of new workers is low; productivity of new but experienced workers is
       low in the beginning;

(iii) There is increased cost of training and induction;

(iv) New workers cause increased breakage of tools, wastage of materials, etc.

(v) Cost of recruitment and training increases.

Cost of Employees (Labour) Turnover: Two types of costs which are associated
with employee turnover are:

(a) Preventive Costs: The cost incurred to prevent employee turnover or keep
       it as lowest as possible. Cost incurred for prevention of employee turnover
       includes the following:

       (i) Cost of medical benefit provided to the employees;

       (ii) Cost incurred on employees' welfare like pension etc.

       (iii) Cost on other benefits with an objective to retain employees.

(b) Replacement Costs: These are the costs which arise due to employee
       turnover. If employees leave soon after they acquire the necessary training
       and experience of good work, additional costs will have to be incurred on
       new workers, i.e., cost of recruitment, training and induction, abnormal
       breakage and scrap and extra wages and overheads due to the inefficiency
       of new workers.

It is obvious that a company will incur very high replacement costs if the rate of
employee turnover is high. Similarly, only adequate preventive costs can keep
Employee turnover at a low level. Each company must, therefore, work out the
optimum level of Employee turnover keeping in view its personnel policies and
the behaviour of replacement cost and preventive costs at various levels of
Employee turnover rates.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                            3.513.51

ILLUSTRATION 15

The management of B.R Ltd. is worried about their increasing employee turnover in
the factory and before analyzing the causes and taking remedial steps; it wants to
have an idea of the profit foregone as a result of employee turnover in the last year.

Last year sales amounted to ` 83,03,300 and P/V ratio was 20 per cent. The total number
of actual hours worked by the direct employee force was 4.45 lakhs. The actual direct
employee hours included 30,000 hours attributable to training new recruits, out of which
half of the hours were unproductive. As a result of the delays by the Personnel Department
in filling vacancies due to employee turnover, 1,00,000 potentially productive hours
(excluding unproductive training hours) were lost.

The costs incurred consequent on employee turnover revealed, on analysis, the
following:

           Settlement cost due to leaving          ` 43,820

           Recruitment costs                       ` 26,740

           Selection costs                         ` 12,750

           Training costs                          ` 30,490

Assuming that the potential production lost as a consequence of employee turnover
could have been sold at prevailing prices, FIND the profit foregone last year on
account of employee turnover.

SOLUTION

Workings:

(i) Computation of productive hours

Actual hours worked (given)                        4,45,000

Less: Unproductive training hours                  15,000

Actual productive hours                            4,30,000

(ii) Productive hours lost:

Loss of potential productive hours + Unproductive training hours

= 1,00,000 + 15,000 = 1,15,000 hours

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   3.52                        COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(iii) Loss of contribution due to unproductive hours:

=          Sales value  hours  ×Total  unproductive  hours
   Actual productive

=  ` 83,03,300   ×  1,15,000   hours  =  `22,20,650
   4,30,000 hrs

Contribution lost for 1,15,000 hours =   `  22,20,650  ×20  =  `4,44,130
                                              100

Computation of profit forgone on account of employee turnover

Contribution foregone (as calculated above)                            (`)
Settlement cost due to leaving                                 4,44,130
Recruitment cost
Selection cost                                                    43,820
Training costs                                                    26,740
Profit foregone                                                   12,750
                                                                  30,490
                                                               5,57,930

     12. DIRECT EXPENSES

12.1 Direct Expenses

Expenses other than direct material cost and direct employee cost, which are
incurred to manufacture a product or for provision of service and can be directly
traced in an economically feasible manner to a cost object. The following costs
are examples for direct expenses:
(i) Royalty paid/ payable for production or provision of service;
(ii) Hire charges paid for hiring specific equipment;
(iii) Cost for product/ service specific design or drawing;
(iv) Cost of product/ service specific software;
(v) Other expenses which are directly related with the production of goods or

       provision of service.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.533.53

The above list of expenses is not exhaustive, any other expenses which are
directly attributable to the production or service are also included as direct
expenses.

12.2 Measurement of Direct Expenses

The direct expenses are measured at invoice or agreed price net of rebate or
discount but includes duties and taxes (for which input credit not available),
commission and other directly attributable costs.

In case of sub-contracting, where goods are get manufactured by job workers
independent of the principal entity, are measured at agreed price. Where the
principal supplies some materials to the job workers, the value of such materials
and other incidental expenses are added with the job charges paid to the job
workers.

12.3 Treatment of Direct Expenses

Direct Expenses form part of the prime cost for the product or service to which it
can be directly traceable and attributable. In case of lump-sum payment or one-
time payment, the cost is amortised over the estimated production volume or
benefit derived.

If the expenses incurred are of insignificant amount i.e. not material, it can be
treated as part of overheads.

ILLUSTRATION 16

Aditya Ltd. is an engineering manufacturing company producing job order on the
basis of specification given by the customers. During the last the month it has
completed three job works namely A, B and C. The following are the items of
expenditures which are incurred apart from direct materials and direct employee
cost:

(i) Office and administration cost- ` 3,00,000.

(ii) Product blueprint cost for job A ­ ` 1,40,000

(iii) Hire charges paid for machinery used for job work B- ` 40,000

(iv) Salary to office attendants- ` 50,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             3.54       COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(v) One time license fee paid for software used to make computerised graphics
       for job C- ` 50,000.

(vi) Salary paid to marketing manager- ` 1,20,000.
Required:
CALCULATE direct expenses attributable to each job.
SOLUTION

Calculation of Direct expenses

Particulars             Job A (`) Job B (`) Job C (`)

Product blueprint cost  1,40,000                       --      --

Hire charges paid for                              --  40,000  --

machinery

license fee paid for                               --  --      50,000

software

Total Direct expenses   1,40,000                       40,000  50,000

Note:
(i) Office and administration cost is classified as overheads.
(ii) Salary paid to office attendants is classified under office and administration

       cost.
(iii) Salary paid to marketing manager is classified under selling overheads

SUMMARY

 Employee Cost: Benefits paid or payable to the employees of an entity,
       whether permanent or temporary for the services rendered by them.
       Employee cost includes payments made in cash or kind.

 Direct Employee (Labour) Cost: Benefits paid or payable to the employees
       which can be attributed to a cost object in an economically feasible manner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.553.55

 Indirect Employee (Labour) Cost: Benefits paid or payable to the
       employees, which cannot be directly attributable to a particular cost object
       in an economically feasible manner.

 Idle Time: The time for which the employer pays but obtains no direct
       benefit or for no productive purpose.

 Normal Idle Time: Time which cannot be avoided or reduced in the normal
       course of business. The cost of normal idle time should be charged to the
       cost of production.

 Abnormal Idle Time: It arises on account of abnormal causes and should
       be charged to Costing Profit and Loss account.

 Time Keeping: It refers to recording and keeping of the employees'
       attendance time.

 Time Booking: It is basically recording the details of work done and the
       time spent by an employee on each job or process.

 Overtime: Payment to employees, when an employee works beyond the
       normal working hours. Usually overtime has to be paid at double the rate of
       normal hours.

 Overtime Premium: It's the amount of extra payment paid to an employee
       for extra work.

 Employee (Labour) Turnover: It is the rate of change in employee force
       during a specified period due to resignation, retirement and retrenchment.
       If the employee turnover is high, it's a sign of instability and may affect the
       profitability of the firm.

 Employee (Labour) turnover can be measured through the following
       methods:

       (i) Replacement Method:

                    Number of employees replaced ×100
                 Average number of employees on roll

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          3.56             COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

  (ii) Separation Method:

          Number of employees separated during the year          ×100

  Average number of employees on rolls during the period

  (iii) Flux Method:

  Number of employees separated+number of employees replaced     ×100
         Average number of employees on rolls during the period

  (iv) Employee turnover due to new recruitment:

  Number  of new employees joining in a period (excluding replacements)  ×100
           Average number of employees on the roll in a period

  (v) Employee turnover including accessions:

  Number  of new employees joining in a period (excluding replacements)  ×100
           Average number of employees on the roll in a period

                                         OR
  Number of separations + number of accessions ×100

             Average number of employees

 Time Rate System: The system of wage payment where wages to an
       employee is paid on the basis of time irrespective of production volume.

 Straight Piece Work: The system of wage payment where wages is paid on
       the basis of number of units produced irrespective of time spent for
       production. Calculation takes number of units produced by the employee
       multiplied by rate per unit.

 Halsey System: Time taken × Time rate + 50% of time saved × Time rate.

  Rowan System: Time taken × Rate per hour +TTimimeeasllaovweedd× Time taken ×

  Rate per hour

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.573.57

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs)

1. Idle time is the time under which-
       (a) Full wages are paid to workers
       (b) No productivity is given by the workers
       (c) Both (a) and (b)
       (d) None of the above

2. Cost of idle time due to non- availability of raw material is-
       (a) Charged to overhead costs
       (b) Charged to respective jobs
       (c) Charged to costing profit and loss account
       (d) None of the above

3. Time and motion study is conducted by-
       (a) Time keeping department
       (b) Personnel department
       (c) Payroll department
       (d) Engineering department

4. Identify, which one of the following, does not account for increasing labour
       productivity-
       (a) Job satisfaction
       (b) Motivating workers
       (c) High labour turnover
       (d) Proper supervision and control

5. Labour turnover is measured by-
       (a) Number of persons replaced/ average number of workers

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.58  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       (b) Numbers of persons separated / number of workers at the beginning of the year
       (c) (Number of persons replaced + number of persons separated)/(number of

               persons at the beginning + the number of persons at the end of the year)
       (d) None of the above
6. Time booking refers to a method wherein .................. of an employee is recorded.
       (a) Attendance
       (b) Food expenses
       (c) Health status
       (d) Time spent on a particular job
7. Employee Cost includes-
       (a) Wages and salaries
       (b) Allowances and incentives
       (c) Payment for overtime
       (d) All of the above
8. If the time saved is less than 50% of the standard time, then the wages under
       Rowan and Halsey premium plan on comparison gives-
       (a) More wages to workers under Rowan plan than Halsey plan
       (b) More wages to workers under Halsey plan than Rowan plan
       (c) Equal wages under two plans
       (d) None of the above
9. Standard time of a job is 60 hours and guaranteed time rate is `0.30 per hour.
       What is the amount of wages under Rowan plan if job is completed in 48 hours?
       (a) ` 16.20
       (b) ` 17.28
       (c) ` 18.00
       (d) ` 14.40

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.593.59

10. Important factors for control of employee cost can be-
       (a) Time and Motion Study
       (b) Control over idle time and overtime
       (c) Control over employee turnover
       (d) All of the above

11. Out of the following methods attendance is marked by recognizing an employee
       based on physical and behavioural traits-
       (a) Punch Card Attendance method
       (b) Bio- Metric Attendance system
       (c) Attendance Register method
       (d) Token Method

12. If overtime is required for meeting urgent orders, the overtime premium should
       be charged as-
       (a) Respective job
       (b) Overhead cost
       (c) Costing P& L A/c
       (d) None of above

Theoretical Questions

1. DISCUSS the accounting treatment of Idle time and overtime wages.
2. DISCUSS the effect of overtime payment on productivity.
3. STATE the circumstances in which time rate system of wage payment can be

       preferred in a factory.
4. DISCUSS the objectives of time keeping & time booking.
5. DISCUSS the two types of cost associated with labour turnover.
6. DESCRIBE briefly, how wages may be calculated under the following systems:

       (i) Rowan system
       (ii) Halsey system

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           3.60     COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Practical Problems

1. Mr. A. is working by employing 10 skilled workers. He is considering the
       introduction of some incentive scheme - either Halsey Scheme (with 50% bonus)
       or Rowan Scheme - of wage payment for increasing the Employee productivity to
       cope with the increased demand for the product by 25%. He feels that if the
       proposed incentive scheme could bring about an average 20% increase over the
       present earnings of the workers, it could act as sufficient incentive for them to
       produce more and he has accordingly given this assurance to the workers.

As a result of the assurance, the increase in productivity has been observed as
revealed by the following figures for the current month:

Hourly rate of wages (guaranteed)                         `40

Average time for producing 1 piece by one worker at the   2 hours
previous performance (This may be taken as time allowed)

No. of working days in the month                          25

No. of working hours per day for each worker              8

Actual production during the month                        1,250 units

Required:

(i) CALCULATE effective rate of earnings per hour under Halsey Scheme and
       Rowan Scheme.

(ii) CALCULATE the savings to Mr. A in terms of direct labour cost per piece
       under the schemes.

2. Wage negotiations are going on with the recognised employees' union, and
       the management wants you as an executive of the company to formulate an
       incentive scheme with a view to increase productivity.

The case of three typical workers A, B and C who produce respectively 180,
120 and 100 units of the company's product in a normal day of 8 hours is
taken up for study.

Assuming that day wages would be guaranteed at ` 75 per hour and the
piece rate would be based on a standard hourly output of 10 units,
CALCULATE the earnings of each of the three workers and the employee cost

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.613.61

       per 100 pieces under (i) Day wages, (ii) Piece rate, (iii) Halsey scheme, and (iv)
       The Rowan scheme.

       Also CALCULATE under the above schemes the average cost of labour for the
       company to produce 100 pieces.

3. The following expenditures were incurred in Aditya Ltd. For the month of
       March 2023:

                                                                                         (`)

(i) Paid for power & fuel                          4,80,200

(ii) Wages paid to factory workers                 8,44,000

(iii) Bill paid to job workers                     9,66,000

(iv) Royalty paid for production                   8,400

(v) Fee paid to technician hired for the job       96,000

(vi) Administrative overheads                      76,000

(vii) Commission paid to sales staffs              1,26,000

You are required to CALCULATE direct expenses for the month.

Case Scenarios

1. The board of the J Ltd. has been appraised by the General Manager (HR) that the
       employee attrition rate in the company has increased. The following facts has
       been presented by the GM(HR):

       (1) Training period of the new recruits is 50,000 hours. During this period their
               productivity is 60% of the experienced workers. Time required by an
               experienced worker is 10 hours per unit.

       (2) 20% of the output during training period was defective. Cost of rectification
              of a defective unit was ` 25.

       (3) Potential productive hours lost due to delay in recruitment were 1,00,000
               hours.

       (4) Selling price per unit is ` 180 and P/V ratio is 20%.

       (5) Settlement cost of the workers leaving the organization was ` 1,83,480.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.62  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       (6) Recruitment cost was ` 1,56,340
       (7) Training cost was ` 1,13,180
       You being an associate finance to GM(HR), has been asked the following
       questions:
       (i) How much quantity of output is lost due to labour turnover?

               (a) 10,000 units
               (b) 8,000 units
               (c) 12,000 units
               (d) 12,600 units
       (ii) How much loss in the form of contribution, the company incurred due to
               labour turnover?
              (a) ` 4,32,000
              (b) ` 4,20,000
              (c) ` 4,36,000
              (d) ` 4,28,000
       (iii) What is the cost repairing of defective units?
              (a) ` 75,000
              (b) ` 15,000
              (c) ` 50,000
              (d) ` 25,000
       (iv) Calculate the profit lost by the company due to increased labour turnover.
              (a) ` 7,50,000
              (b) ` 15,00,000
              (c) ` 5,00,000
              (d) ` 9,00,000
       (v) How much quantity of output is lost due to inexperience of the new
               worker?
               (a) 1,000 units

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                  3.633.63

  (b) 2,600 units
  (c) 2,000 units
  (d) 12,600 units

ANSWERS

Answers to the MCQs                                (d) 4. (c) 5. (a) 6. (d)
                                                   (b) 10. (d) 11. (b) 12. (a)
 1. (c) 2. (c) 3.
 7. (d) 8. (a) 9.

Answers to the Theoretical Questions

1. Please refer paragraph 5 & 6
2. Please refer paragraph 6
3. Please refer paragraph 8.1
4. Please refer paragraph 4.1 & 4.2
5. Please refer paragraph 11.3
6. Please refer paragraph 8.3

Answers to the Practical Problems

1. Working Notes:
       1. Actual time taken to produce 1,250 pieces
               = No. of working days in the month × No. of working hours per day
                       of each worker × No. of workers
               = 25 days × 8 hrs. × 10 workers = 2,000 hours
       2. Total time wages of 10 workers per month:
               = No. of working days in the month × No. of working hours per day
                       of each worker × Hourly rate of wages × No. of workers
               = 25 days × 8 hrs. × `40 × 10 workers = `80,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.64      COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

3. Time saved per month:

Time allowed per piece to a worker                                                  2 hours

No. of units produced during the month by 10 workers                                1,250 pieces

Total time allowed to produce 1,250 pieces (1,250 × 2 hours) 2,500 hours

Actual time taken to produce 1,250 pieces                                           2,000 hours

Time saved (2,500 hours ­ 2,000 hours)                                              500 hours

4. Bonus under Halsey scheme to be paid to 10 workers:

Bonus  = (50% of time saved) × hourly rate of wages

       = 50/100 × 500 hours × `40 = `10,000

Total wages to be paid to 10 workers are (`80,000 + `10,000) `90,000, if
Mr. A considers the introduction of Halsey Incentive Scheme to increase
the employee productivity.

5. Bonus under Rowan Scheme to be paid to 10 workers:

Bonus  =   Time taken                              ×  Time  saved  ×  hourly  rate
          Time allowed

       = 2,000 hours × 500 hours × ` 40 = `16,000
           2,500 hours

Total wages to be paid to 10 workers are (`80,000 + `16,000)
` 96,000, if Mr. A considers the introduction of Rowan Incentive Scheme
to increase the Employee productivity.

(i) (a) Effective hourly rate of earnings under Halsey scheme:

       (Refer to Working Notes 1, 2, 3 and 4)

       = Total time wages of 10 workers+Total bonus under Halsey scheme
                                     Total hours worked

       =  ` 80,000 + ` 10,000                         = `45
              2,000 hours

(b) Effective hourly rate of earnings under Rowan scheme:
       (Refer to Working Notes 1, 2, 3 and 5)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                                      3.653.65

          Total time wages of                      +  Total bonus under

       = 10 workers                                   Rowan scheme

                                                   Total hours worked

       =  ` 80,000+`16,000                         = `48
              2,000 hours

(ii) (a) Saving in terms of direct Employee cost per piece under
       Halsey scheme:

       (Refer to Working Note 4)

       Employee cost per piece (under time wage scheme)

       = 2hours × `40 = `80.

       Employee cost per piece (under Halsey scheme)

          Total wages paid under the scheme                            ` 90,000  =  `72
       = Total number of units produced =                               1,250

                               Saving per piece: (`80 ­ `72) = `8
                       (b) Saving in terms of direct Employee cost per piece

                                under Rowan Scheme:
                               (Refer to Working Note 5)
                               Employee cost per piece under Rowan scheme
                               = `96,000/1,250 units = `76.80
                               Saving per piece = `80 ­ `76.80 = `3.20
2. Calculation of earnings under different wage schemes:
       (i) Day wages

Worker Day wages (`)                               Actual Output       Labour cost per
                                                        (Units)         100 pieces (`)
  A        600                                            180
  B        600                                            120                333.33
  C        600                                            100                500.00
Total     1,800                                           400                600.00

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   3.66                      COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Average labour cost to produce 100 pieces:

   Total wages paid                                 ` 1,  800    ×100
= Total output                                     400    units
                             × 100 =                                   = `450

(ii) Piece rate

Worker Actual Output                                Piece          Wages Labour cost per
                   (Units)                         rate (`)      earned (`) 100 pieces (`)

   A                180                              7.50          1,350            750.00
                                                     7.50
   B                120                              7.50          900              750.00

   C                100                                            750              750.00

   Total            400                                            3,000

Average cost of labour for the company to produce 100 pieces:

=   ` 3,000         ×100  = `750
   400 units

(iii) Halsey Scheme

Worker Actual Std. Actual Time                             Bonus   Rate Total wages Labour cost
            Output time time saved                         hours
            (Units) (Hrs.) (Hrs.) (Hrs.)                  (50% of      per     (`)  per 100
                                                            time
                                                          saved)   hour             pieces (`)

                                                                       (`)

                 A   B       C D=B-C                         E         F G = F x (C+E) H=G/A*100

   A      180 18 8                                 10        5         75      975  541.67
                                                                                    625.00
   B      120 12 8                                 4         2         75      750  675.00

   C      100 10 8                                 2         1         75      675

   Total 400                                                                2,400

Average cost of labour for the company to produce 100 pieces =

 ` 2,  400    ×100  =     `  600
400    units

(iv) Rowan Scheme:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   EMPLOYEE COST AND DIRECT EXPENSES                           3.673.67

Worker Actual Std. Actual Time Bonus Rate Total wages Labour cost

          Output time time saved hours* per including per                     100

          (Units) (Hrs.) (Hrs.) (Hrs.)                hour bonus (`) pieces (`)

                                                      (`)

                 A     B  C D=B-C E                   F G=F×(C+E) H=G/A*100

   A      180 18          8                        10 4.44 75   933      518.33
                                                                800      666.67
   B      120 12          8                        4  2.67 75   720      720.00
                                                               2,453
   C      100 10          8                        2  1.60 75

    Total 400
* Bonus hours = TimeSaved ×Actualtime

                        Std. Time

Average cost of labour for the company to produce 100 pieces

=   ` 2,  453    ×100  = ` 613.25
   400    units

3. Calculation of Direct Expenses

                                                                      (`)

   (i) Paid for power & fuel                                   4,80,200

   (ii) Bill paid to job workers                               9,66,000

   (iii) Royalty paid for production                                  8,400

   (iv) Fee paid to the technician                                    96,000

      Total Direct expenses                                    15,50,600

Notes:

(i) Wages paid to factory workers is direct employee cost.

(ii) Administrative overhead is indirect expense.

(iii) Commission paid to sales staffs comes under selling expenses.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.68             COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Answers To The Case Scenarios

1.
          i. (c) ii. (a) iii. (b) iv. (d) v. (c)

(i) (c) Output by experienced workers in 50,000 hours

=  50,000  =5,000  units
     10

 Output by new recruits = 60% of 5,000 = 3,000 units

Loss of output                                     = 5,000 ­ 3,000 = 2,000 units

Total loss of output                               = Due to delay recruitment + Due to
                                                             inexperience

                                                   = 10,000 + 2,000 = 12,000 units

(ii) (a) Contribution per unit                     = 20% of `180 = ` 36

Total contribution lost                            = `36 × 12,000 units = ` 4,32,000

(iii) (b) Cost of repairing defective units = 3,000 units × 0.2 × ` 25
               = ` 15,000

(iv) (d) Calculation of loss of profit due to labour turnover

                                                                                  (`)

Loss of Contribution                                                     4,32,000

Cost of repairing defective units                                        15,000

Recruitment cost                                                         1,56,340

Training cost                                                            1,13,180

Settlement cost of workers leaving                                       1,83,480

Profit forgone in 2022-23                                                9,00,000

(v) (c) Output by experienced workers in 50,000 hours

=     50,000  =  5,000  units
        10

 Output by new recruits = 60% of 5,000 = 3,000 units

Loss of output                                     = 5,000 ­ 3,000 = 2,000 units

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
