CHAPTER  1

INTRODUCTION TO
COST AND
MANAGEMENT
ACCOUNTING

                                      LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to-

 State the meaning, objective and importance of Cost and
       Management Accounting.

 Discuss the functions and role of Cost Accounting Department in an
       organization.

 Discuss the installation of a Cost Accounting System in an
       organization.

 Differentiate between Cost Accounting, Financial Accounting and
       Management Accounting.

 List the various elements and classifications of cost.
 Explain the methods of segregating semi-variable costs into fixed and

       variable cost.
 Discuss the concept of cost reduction and cost control.
 Discuss the methods and techniques of costing.
 A brief discussion on Digital Costing System.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.2                    COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

  Objectives of Cost          Use of IT in    Cost Objects
  and Management                 Costing
                                              Responsibility
       Accounting         Users of Cost and       Centres
                             Management
     Scope of Cost            Accounting            Cost
       Accounting                             Classification
                         Role & Functions of
 Relationship of Cost  Cost and Management
  and Management
                              Accounting
Accounting with other
  related desciplines

     1. INTRODUCTION

Michael E. Porter in his theory of Generic Competitive Strategies has described
`Cost Leadership' as one of the three strategic dimensions (others are `Product
differentiation' and `Focus or Niche') to achieve competitive advantage in
industry. Cost Leadership implies producing goods or provision of services at
lowest cost while maintaining quality to have better competitive price. In a
business environment where each entity is thriving to achieve apex position not
only in domestic but global competitive market, it is essential for the entity to fit
into any of the three competitive strategic dimensions. Cost Leadership, also in
line with the subject Cost and Management Accounting, can be achieved if an
entity has a robust Cost and Management Accounting system in place. In this
chapter, we will learn various aspects of Cost and Management Accounting and
its application in manufacturing and service environment.

1.1 Meaning and Definition

(i) Cost- Cost is the amount of resource given up in exchange of some goods
       or services. It can be expressed as a noun as well as a verb. As a noun, it

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.13.3
                                              ACCOUNTING

can be defined as the amount of expenditure (actual or notional) incurred
on or attributable to a specified article, product or activity.

As a verb, it can be as an action to ascertain the cost of a specified thing or
activity.

(ii) Costing- Costing is defined as "the technique and process of ascertaining
       costs".

According to CIMA "an organisation's costing system is the foundation of
the internal financial information system for managers. It provides the
information that management needs to plan and control the organisation's
activities and to make decisions about the future."

(iii) Cost Accounting- Cost Accounting is defined as "the process of
       accounting for cost which begins with the recording of income and
       expenditure or the bases on which they are calculated and ends with the
       preparation of periodical statements and reports for ascertaining and con-
       trolling costs."

(iv) Cost Accountancy- Cost Accountancy has been defined as "the
       application of costing and cost accounting principles, methods and
       techniques to the science, art and practice of cost control and the
       ascertainment of profitability. It includes the presentation of information
       derived there from for the purpose of managerial decision making."

(v) Management Accounting- As per CIMA Official Terminology "Management
       Accounting is the application of the principles of accounting and
       financial management to create, protect, preserve and increase value for
       the stakeholders of for-profit and not-for-profit enterprises in the public
       and private sectors."

Management Accounting is an integral part of management function. It
assists management by provision of relevant information for planning,
organising, controlling, decision making etc.

(vi) Cost Management- It is an application of management accounting
       concepts, methods of collections, analysis and presentation of data to
       provide the information needed to plan, monitor and control costs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.4               COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

2. OBJECTIVES OF COST ACCOUNTING

                  Objectives of Cost Accounting

Ascertainment of  Determination                    Cost Control     Cost         Assisting
        Cost      of Selling Price                               Reduction  Management in
                  and Profitability                                         Decision Making

                                                   Determination of pre-determined standard

                                                   Measurement of actual performance

                                                                 Comparison

                                                   Analysis of variance and action

The main objectives of Cost and Management Accounting are explained as below:

(i) Ascertainment of Cost: The main objective of Cost Accounting is
       accumulation and ascertainment of cost. Costs are accumulated, assigned
       and ascertained for each cost object. This cost object may be a unit, job,
       operation, process, department or service.

(ii) Determination of Selling Price and Profitability: The Cost Accounting
       System helps in determination of selling price and thus profitability of a cost
       object. Though in a competitive business environment selling prices are
       determined by external factors but cost accounting system provides a basis
       for price fixation and rate negotiation.

(iii) Cost Control: Maintaining discipline in expenditure is one of the main
       objectives of a good cost accounting system. It ensures that expenditures
       are in consonance with predetermined set standard and any variation
       from these set standards is noted and reported on continuous basis. To
       exercise control over cost, following steps are followed:

       (a) Determination of pre-determined standard or results: Standard cost or
               performance targets for a cost object or a cost centre are set before

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.15.5
                                              ACCOUNTING

initiation of production or service activity. These are desired cost or result
that need to be achieved.

(b) Measurement of actual performance: Actual cost or result of the cost
       object or cost centre is measured. Performance should be measured in
       the same manner in which the targets are set i.e., if the targets are set up
       operation-wise, and then the actual costs should also be collected and
       measured operation-wise to have a common basis for comparison.

(c) Comparison of actual performance with set standard or target: The actual
       performance so measured is compared against the set standard and
       desired target. Any deviation (variance) between the two is noted and
       reported to the appropriate person or authority.

(d) Analysis of variance and action: The variance in results so noted is further
       analysed to know the reasons for variance and appropriate action is
       taken to ensure compliance in future. If necessary, the standards are
       further amended to take developments into account.

(iv) Cost Reduction: It may be defined "as the achievement of real and
       permanent reduction in the unit cost of goods manufactured or services
       rendered without impairing their suitability for the use intended or
       diminution in the quality of the product."

Cost Reduction is an approach of management where cost of an object is
believed to have a scope of further reduction. No cost is termed as lowest
and every possibility of cost reduction is explored. To do cost reduction, the
following action is taken:

(a) Each activity within an entity is segmented to analyse and identify value
       added and non- value added activities. All non-value added activities are
       eliminated without affecting the essential characteristics of the product
       or process. Value Chain Analysis, a strategic tool, developed by Michael
       Porter, is one of the method to do value analysis.

(b) Conducting continuous research and study to know the most optimal
       way to manufacture a product or render a service.

The three-fold assumptions involved in the definition of cost reduction may
be summarised as under:

(a) There is a saving in unit cost.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          1.6           COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       (b) Such saving is of permanent nature.

       (c) The utility and quality of the goods and services remain unaffected, if not
               improved.

(v) Assisting Management in Decision Making: Cost and Management
       Accounting by providing relevant information, assist management in
       planning, implementing, measuring, controlling and evaluating of various
       activities. A robust cost and management accounting system provides
       internal and external information to the industry which will be relevant for
       decision making.

2.1 Difference between Cost Control and Cost Reduction

          Cost Control                                          Cost Reduction

1. Cost control aims at maintaining 1. Cost reduction is concerned with

the costs in accordance with the reducing costs. It challenges all standards

established standards.                             and endeavours to improvise them

                                                   continuously

2. Cost control seeks to attain 2. Cost reduction recognises no condition as

lowest possible cost under permanent, since a change will result in

existing conditions.                               lower cost.

3. In case of cost control, emphasis 3. In case of cost reduction, it is on present

is on past and present                             and future.

4. Cost control is a preventive 4. Cost reduction is a corrective function. It

function                                           operates even when an efficient cost

                                                   control system exists.

5. Cost control ends when targets 5. Cost reduction has no visible end and is a

are achieved.                                      continuous process.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                                       1.17.7
                                              ACCOUNTING

3. SCOPE OF COST ACCOUNTING

 Scope of                                                   Costing
    Cost                                              Cost Accounting

Accounting                                               Cost Analysis
                                                     Cost Comparisons

                                                         Cost Control
                                                         Cost Reports
                                                   Statutory Compliances

Scope of Cost Accounting consists of the following functions:

(i) Costing: Costing is the technique and process of ascertaining costs of
       products or services. The cost ascertainment procedure is governed by
       some cost accounting principles and rules. Generally, cost is ascertained
       using historical costs, standard costs, process cost, operation cost etc.

(ii) Cost Accounting: This is a process of accounting for cost which begins
       with the recording of expenditure and ends with the preparation of
       periodical statement and reports for ascertaining and controlling cost. Cost
       Accounting is a formal mechanism of cost ascertainment.

(iii) Cost Analysis: It involves the process of finding out the factors
       responsible for variance in actual costs from the budgeted costs and
       accordingly fixation of responsibility for cost differences. This also helps in
       taking better cost management and strategic decisions.

(iv) Cost Comparisons: Cost accounting also includes comparisons of cost
       involved in alternative courses of action such as use of different
       technology for production, cost of making different products and activities,
       and cost of same product/ service over a period of time.

(v) Cost Control: It involves a detailed examination of each cost in the light
       of advantage received from the incurrence of the cost. Thus, we can state

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.8                 COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       that cost is analyzed to know whether cost is not exceeding its budgeted cost
       and whether further cost reduction is possible or not.

(vi) Cost Reports: This is the ultimate function of cost accounting. These
       reports are primarily prepared for use by the management at different
       levels. Cost Reports helps in planning and control, performance appraisal and
       managerial decision making.

(vii) Statutory Compliances: Maintaining cost accounting records as per the
       rules prescribed by the statute to maintain cost records relating to
       utilization of materials, labour and other items of cost as applicable to the
       production of goods or provision of services as provided in the Act and
       these rules.

4. RELATIONSHIP                                    OF  COST                  AND

MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING WITH OTHER

RELATED DISCIPLINES

Cost and Management Accounting as a discipline is interrelated and dependent
on other disciplines of accounting.

4.1 Cost Accounting with Management Accounting

As we have already studied that though Cost Accounting and Management
Accounting is used synonymously but there are a few differences. Management
Accounting is an open-ended discipline which enables managers to take informed
decisions. Management Accounting takes inputs from cost accounts, financial
accounts, statistical and operation management tools etc.

Difference between Cost Accounting and Management Accounting

             Basis  Cost Accounting                    Management Accounting
(i) Nature
                    It records the quantitative It records both qualitative and
(ii) Objective
                    aspect only.                       quantitative aspect.

                    It records the cost of It provides information to

                    producing a product and management for planning

                    providing a service.               and co-ordination.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                                     1.19.9
                                              ACCOUNTING

(iii) Area         It only deals with cost It is wider in scope as it includes

                   Ascertainment.                           financial accounting, budgeting,

                                                            taxation, planning etc.

(iv) Recording of It uses both past and It is focused with the

data               present figures.                         projection of figures for

                                                            future.

(v) Development Its development is related Its development is related to
                             to industrial revolution. the need of modern business
                                                                   world.

(vi) Rules and     It          follows             certain  It does not follow any specific
       Regulation                                           rules and regulations.
                   principles and procedures

                   for recording costs of

                   different products.

4.2 Cost Accounting with Financial Accounting

Cost accounting accumulates and ascertains costs for goods sold and inventories.
It provides inputs to record costs in financial accounting system.

Difference between Financial Accounting and Cost Accounting

Basis                  Financial Accounting                          Cost Accounting

(i) Objective      It provides information about Ascertainment of cost for

                   the financial performance of the purpose of cost control

                   an entity.                               and decision making.

(ii) Nature        It classifies records, present It classifies, costs records,

                   and interprets transactions in present, and interprets it in a

                   monetary terms.                          significant manner.

(iii) Recording    It records Historical data.              It makes use of           both
        of data                                                                       pre-
                                                            historical  and

                                                            determined costs.

(iv) Users of The users of financial The cost accounting
        information accounting statements are information is generally

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        1.10              COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

              shareholders,                        creditors, used           by      internal
                                                                                           But
              financial analysts and management.
                                                                                  regulatory
              government and its agencies, sometimes

              etc.                                             authorities also.

(v) Analysis of It shows profit or loss of the It provides the cost details

cost and organization either segment for each cost object i.e.

profit        wise or as a whole.                              product, process, job,

                                                               operation, contracts etc.

(vi) Time period Financial Statements are Reports and statements are
                            prepared usually for a year. prepared as and when
                                                                        required.

(vii) Presentation A set format is used for In general, no set formats for

of            presenting                           financial presenting cost information

information information.                                       is followed.

4.3 Cost and Management Accounting with Financial
      Management

Cost and Management Accounting is an application of Financial Management
for decision making purposes.

The relationship among Cost Accounting, Management Accounting, Financial
Accounting and Financial Management can be understood with the help of the
following diagram.

                     Financial                     Management
                    Accounting                      Accounting

                                                       Cost
                                                   Accounting

                    Financial Management

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.11.111
                                              ACCOUNTING

5. ROLE & FUNCTIONS OF COST AND
    MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

The role of a cost and management accounting system is to:

· Provide relevant information to management for decision making,

· Assist management for planning, measurement, evaluation and controlling of
       business activities,

· Help in allocation of cost to products and inventories for both external and
       internal users.

Though the term Cost Accounting and Management Accounting is used by
various authors synonymously but in actual practice, Cost Accounting is
concerned with accumulation and allocation of costs to different cost
objects, whereas, Management Accounting concerned with provision of
information to internal users for decision making.

The functions of Cost and Management Accounting include:

(i) Collection and accumulation of cost for each element of cost.

(ii) Assigning costs to cost objects to ascertain cost.

(iii) Cost and Management Accounting Department (whatever nomenclature
       may be used to denote the department) sets budget and standards for a
       particular period or activity beforehand and these are compared with the
       assigned and ascertained cost. Any deviation with the set standards are
       analysed and reported. All this exercise is done to control costs.

(iv) The main function of Cost and Management Accounting is provision of
       relevant information to the management for decision making. An
       Information system environment is set up which is popularly known as
       Management Information System (MIS). The MIS provides relevant and
       timely information related to both internal and external to the organisation
       to enable management at all levels to take decisions. Decisions include cost
       optimisation, price fixation, implementation of any plan related with
       product, process, marketing etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.12  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(v) The performance of a responsibility centre is measured and evaluated
       against the set standards. The function of Cost and Management
       Accounting is to gather data like time taken, wastages, process idleness etc.,
       analyse the data, prepare reports and take necessary actions.

     6. USERS OF COST AND MANAGEMENT
           ACCOUNTING

Cost and Management Accounting information which is generated or collected is
used by different stakeholders. The users of the information can be broadly
categorised into internal and external to the entity.

Internal users                                     External users
             Policy makers                              Regulatory Authorities
               Managers                                           Auditors
                                                               Shareholders
       Operational level staffs                          Creditors and Lenders
               Employees

Internal Users

Internal users, who use the Cost and Management Accounting information may
include the followings:
(a) Policy Makers- The policy makers are those who formulate strategies

       (i) to achieve the goals (short & long term both) to fulfil the objectives of
               the organisation.

       (ii) to position the organisation into the competitive market environment.
       (iii) to design the organisational structure to get the policy and strategies

               implemented. Etc.
(b) Managers- The managers use the information

       (i) to know the cost of a cost object and cost centre
       (ii) to know the price for the product or service

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.11.313
                                              ACCOUNTING

(iii) to measure and evaluate performance of responsibility centres

(iv) to the know the profitability-product-wise, department-wise,
       customer-wise etc.

(v) to evaluate the strategic options and to make decisions

(c) Operational level staff- The operational level staff like supervisors,
       foreman, team leaders require information

(i) to know the objectives and performance goals for them

(ii) to know product and service specifications like volume, quality and
       process etc.

(iii) to know the performance parameters against which their performance
       is measured and evaluated.

(iv) to know divisional (responsibility centre) profitability etc.

(d) Employees- Employees are concerned with the information related with
       time and attendance, incentives for work, performance standards etc.

External Users

External users, who use the Cost and Management Accounting information may
include the followings:

(a) Regulatory Authorities- Regulatory Authorities are concerned with cost
       accounting data and information for different purpose which includes tariff
       determination, providing subsidies, rate fixation etc. To do this the regulatory
       bodies require information on the basis of some standards and format in
       this regard.

(b) Auditors- The auditors while conducting audit of financial accounts or for
       some other special purpose audit like cost audit etc. require information
       related with costing and reports reviewed by management etc.

(c) Shareholders- Shareholders are concerned with information that effect
       their investment in the entity. Management communicates to the
       shareholders through periodic communique, annual reports etc. regarding
       new orders received, product expansion, market share for products etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.14  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(d) Creditors and Lenders- Creditors and lenders are concerned with data and
       information which affects an entity's ability to serve lenders or creditors. For
       example, any financial institutions which provides loan to an entity against
       book debts and inventories are more concerned with regular reporting on
       net debt position and stock balances.

7. ESSENTIALS OF A GOOD COST ACCOUNTING
    SYSTEM

       Trust on     Informative
      the system    and simple

      Flexible and  Accurate
        adaptive        and

                    authentic

      Integrated    Uniformity
          and            and

       inclusive    consistency

                   Essential features of a good Cost Accounting System
The essential features, which a good Cost Accounting System should possess, are
as follows:
(a) Informative and simple: Cost accounting system should be tailor-made,

       practical, simple and capable of meeting the requirements of a business
       concern. The system of costing should not sacrifice the utility by introducing
       inaccurate and unnecessary details.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.11.515
                                              ACCOUNTING

(b) Accurate and authentic: The data to be used by the cost accounting
       system should be accurate and authenticated; otherwise it may distort the
       output of the system and a wrong decision may be taken.

(c) Uniformity and consistency: There should be uniformity and consistency
       in classification, treatment and reporting of cost data and related
       information. This is required for benchmarking and comparability of the
       results of the system for both horizontal and vertical analysis.

(d) Integrated and inclusive: The cost accounting system should be integrated
       with other systems like financial accounting, taxation, statistics and
       operational research etc. to have a complete overview and clarity in results.

(e) Flexible and adaptive: The cost accounting system should be flexible enough
       to make necessary amendment and modifications in the system to incorporate
       changes in technological, reporting, regulatory and other requirements.

(f) Trust on the system: Management should have trust on the system and its
       output. For this, an active role of management is required for the
       development of such a system that reflects a strong conviction in using
       information for decision making.

     8. INSTALLATION OF COSTING SYSTEM

As in the case of every other form of activity, it should be considered whether it
would be profitable to have a Cost Accounting System. Management of an
organisation needs complete and accurate information to make decisions. A well-
established costing system should provide all relevant information as and when
required by management as well as various stakeholders.

Before setting up a system of cost accounting the factors mentioned below should be
studied:

(a) Objective: The objective of setting up the costing system, for example
       whether it is being introduced for fixing prices or for establishing a system
       of cost control.

(b) Nature of Business or Industry: The industry in which the business is
       operating. Every business or industry has its own uniqueness and objectives.
       According to its cost information requirement, cost accounting methods are

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.16  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       followed. For example, an oil refinery maintains process wise cost accounts
       to find out the cost incurred on a particular process, say in crude refinement
       process etc.

(c) Organisational Hierarchy: Costing system should fulfil the information
       requirements of different levels of management. Top management is
       concerned with the corporate strategy, strategic level management is
       concerned with marketing strategy, product diversification, product pricing
       etc. Operational level management needs the information on standard
       quantity to be consumed, report on idle time etc.

(d) Knowing the product: Nature of the product determines the type of
       costing system to be implemented. The product which has by-products
       requires costing system which accounts for by-products as well. In case of
       perishable or short self- life products, marginal costing is appropriate to
       know the contribution and minimum price at which products could be sold.

(e) Knowing the production process: A good costing system can never be
       established without the complete knowledge of the production process.
       Cost apportionment can be done on the most appropriate and scientific
       basis if a cost accountant can identify degree of effort or resources
       consumed in a particular process. This also includes some basic technical
       know-how and process peculiarity.

(f) Information synchronisation: Establishment of a department or a system
       requires substantial amount of organisational resources. While drafting a
       costing system, information needs of various other departments should be
       taken into account. For example, in a typical business organisation accounts
       department needs to submit monthly stock statement to its lender bank,
       quantity wise stock details at the time of filing returns to tax authorities etc.

(g) Method of maintenance of cost records: The organization must
       determine beforehand the manner in which Cost and Financial Accounts
       could be inter-locked into a single integral accounting system and how the
       results of separate sets of accounts i.e. cost and financial, could be
       reconciled by means of control accounts.

(h) Statutory compliances and audit: Records are to be maintained to comply
       with statutory requirements and applicable cost accounting standards
       should be followed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.11.717
                                              ACCOUNTING

(i) Information Attributes: Information generated from the Costing system
       should possess all the attributes of useful information i.e. it should be
       complete, accurate, timely, relevant. to have an effective management
       information system (MIS).

     9. COST ACCOUNTING WITH THE USE OF

           INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT)

With the expansion of e-commerce and increasing competitive business
environment, information technology is becoming an integral part of each activity
in an organisation including Cost and Management Accounting. Information
technology has changed the Cost and Management Accounting functions
dramatically with the introduction of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
system. Cost Accounting and Management Information System has become
automated and improved. The new industrial revolution in the form of digital
innovation which is popularly known as Industry 4.0, has more emphasis on
digitisation and automation of business process to have a better control over cost to
maintain market competitiveness. Cost Accounting System has seen lots of savings
in terms of time, money and efforts. The impact of IT in Cost Accounting may
include the following:

(i) After the introduction of ERPs, different functional activities get
       integrated and as a consequence, a single entry into the accounting system
       provides custom made reports for every purpose and saves an organisation
       from preparing different sets of documents. Reconciliation process of
       results of both cost and financial accounting systems becomes simpler and
       less cumbersome.

(ii) A move towards paperless environment can be seen where documents like
       Bill of Material, Material Requisition Note, Goods Received Note, labour
       utilisation report etc. are no longer required to be prepared in multiple
       copies, the related department can get e-copy from the system.

(iii) Information Technology with the help of internet (including intranet and
       extranet) are helping in resource procurement and mobilisation. For
       example, production department can get materials from the stores without
       issuing material requisition note physically. Similarly, purchase orders can

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.18  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       be initiated to the suppliers with the help of extranet. This enables an entity
       to shift towards Just-in-Time (JIT) approach of inventory management and
       production.

(iv) Cost information for a cost centre or cost object is ascertained with accuracy
       in timely manner. Each cost centre a cost object is codified and all related
       costs are assigned to the cost objects or cost centres using assigned codes.
       This automates the cost accumulation and ascertainment process. The cost
       information can be customised as per the requirement. For example, when an
       entity manufactures or provides services, managers are able to receive
       information job-wise, batch-wise, process-wise, cost centre wise etc.

(v) Uniformity in preparation of report, budgets and standards can be achieved
       with the help of IT. ERP software plays an important role in bringing
       uniformity irrespective of location, currency, language and regulations.

(vi) Cost and revenue variance reports are generated in real time basis which
       enables the management to take control measures immediately.

(vii) IT enables an entity to monitor and analyse each process of manufacturing
       or service activity closely to eliminate non value-added activities.

The above are examples of few areas where Cost Accounting is done with the
help of IT.

9.1 Digital Costing System

Like the conventional cost accounting system, Digital costing system too collects
data, classify the data, account the data to get and process information to make
decisions, but the difference is the method of collection, medium of storage, forms
of analysis and reporting. Digital costing system links different business functions
such as production, procurement, inventory management with the digital costing
system of its suppliers, customers and the market through data sharing and
network interaction.

Digital Costing System provides data to get the following information:

(i) Cost incurred on a cost object.
(ii) Data on time spent.
(iii) Data on resource consumption.
(iv) Data on current market price of final product and raw materials.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                        1.11.919
                                                   ACCOUNTING

(v) Data on lead time and availability of materials.
(vi) Data on product demand and trend.

Benefits of Digital Costing System

With the help of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine learnings (ML) which helps
in analysis of the Big data and apprehend the consumption and demand pattern,
the following benefits can be achieved:

(i) Ascertainment of cost with certainty on a cost object (the cost object is
       discussed in later paragraph). This helps to analyse the activities for cost
       allocation and apportionment.

(ii) Analysis of data on time spent on each activity to study and formulate
       incentive plans.

(iii) Helps in material requirement planning and scheduling the material
       procurement. Data on resource consumption can be analysed for resource
       optimisation and finding the possibilities for zero wastage and Just-in Time
       (JIT).

(iv) Helps to identify and eliminate the non-value-added activities.

(v) Data on resource consumption is helpful in setting the standards and
       measurement of variances on real time basis.

(vi) Data on current market prices of material and consumables helps to
       estimate cost and setting standards on Marked to Market (M2M) basis.

(vii) Extrapolation of data on customer behaviour towards the products to
       predict the market demand. It is helpful is preparation of budgets and
       planning of production.

(viii) A better analysis of cost behaviour improves the cost benefit analysis and
       equipping the management in informed decision making.

     10. COST OBJECTS

Cost object is anything for which a separate measurement of cost is required.
Cost object may be a product, a service, a project, a customer, a brand category,
an activity, a department or a programme etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            1.20               COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Examples of cost objects are:

Product     Smart phone, Tablet computer, SUV Car, Book etc.

Service     An airline flight from Delhi to Mumbai, Concurrent audit
            assignment, Utility bill payment facility etc.

Project     Metro Rail project, Road projects etc.

Activity    Quality inspection of materials, Placing of orders etc.

Process     Refinement of crudes in oil refineries, melting of billets or ingots
            in rolling mills etc.

Department Production department, Finance & Accounts, Safety etc.

Cost object remains in nucleus of cost classification and analysis of the cost
behaviour. Classification of a cost element as direct, indirect, fixed or variable, all
depends on cost object.

10.1 Cost Units

It is a unit of product, service or time (or combination of these) in relation to
which costs may be ascertained or expressed.

We may for instance determine the cost per ton of steel, per ton-kilometre of a
transport service or cost per machine hour. Sometime, a single order or a contract
constitutes a cost unit. A batch which consists of a group of identical items and
maintains its identity through one or more stages of production may also be
considered as a cost unit.

Cost units are usually the units of physical measurement like number, weight, area,
volume, length, time and value.

A few typical examples of cost units are as follows:

Industry or Product                                Cost Unit Basis

Automobile                                         Number

Cement                                             Ton/ per bag etc.

Chemicals                                          Litre, gallon, kilogram, ton etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                                      1.12.121
                                              ACCOUNTING

Power                                              Kilo-watt hour (kWh)
Steel                                              Ton
Transport                                          Passenger- kilometer
Gas                                                Cubic feet

Some examples from the CIMA terminology are as follows:

Industry Sector             Cost unit
Brewing                     Barrel
Brick-making                1,000 bricks
Coal mining                 Tonne/ton
Electricity                 Kilowatt-hour (kWh)
Engineering                 Contract, job
Oil                         Barrel, tonne, litre
Hotel/Catering              Room/meal
Professional services       Chargeable hour, job, contract
Education                   Course, enrolled student, successful student
Hospitals                   Patient day
Activity                    Cost unit
Credit control              Accounts maintained
Selling                     Customer call, value of sales, orders taken
Materials storage/handling  Requisition unit issued/received, material
                            movement, value issued/received
Personnel administration    Personnel record

10.2 Cost Driver

A Cost driver is a factor or variable which effect level of cost. Generally, it is an
activity which is responsible for cost incurrence. Level of activity or volume of
production is the example of a cost driver. An activity may be an event, task, or
unit of work etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.22          COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

CIMA Official terminology defines cost driver as "Factor influencing the level of
cost" Often used in the context of Activity Based Costing to denote the factor which
links activity resource consumption to product outputs, for example the number of
purchase orders would be a cost driver for procurement cost."

Examples of cost drivers are number of machine set ups, number of purchase
orders, hours spent on product inspection, number of tests performed etc.

     11. RESPONSIBILITY CENTRES

As the organization grows, its functions, organisational structure and other related
functions also grow in terms of volume and complexity. To have a better control over
the organisation, management delegates its responsibility and authority to various
departments or persons. These departments or persons are known as responsibility
centres and are held responsible for performance in terms of expenditure, revenue,
profitability and return on investment. Performance of these responsibility centres
are measured against some set standards (input-output ratio, budgets etc.) and
evaluated against organisational goal and performance targets.

                                     Types of Responsibility Centres

Cost Centres  Revenue                              Profit Centres  Investment
              Centres                                                Centres

(i) Cost Centres: The responsibility centre which is held accountable for
       incurrence of costs which are under its control. The performance of this
       responsibility centre is measured against pre-determined standards or
       budgets. The cost centres are of two types:

       (a) Standard Cost Centre and (b) Discretionary Cost Centre

       (a) Standard Cost Centre: Cost Centre where output is measurable and
               input required for the output can be specified. Based on a well-established
               study, an estimate of standard units of input to produce a unit of output
               is set. The actual cost for inputs is compared with the standard cost. Any
               deviation (variance) in cost is measured and analysed into controllable

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.12.323
                                              ACCOUNTING

and uncontrollable cost. The manager of the cost centre is expected to
comply with the standard and held responsible for adverse cost
variances. The input-output ratio for a standard cost centre is clearly
identifiable.

(b) Discretionary Cost Centre: The cost centre whose output cannot be
       measured in financial terms, thus input-output ratio cannot be defined.
       The cost of input is compared with allocated budget for the activity.
       Examples of discretionary cost centres are Research & Development
       department, Advertisement department where output of these
       department cannot be measured with certainty and co-related with cost
       incurred on inputs.

(ii) Revenue Centres: The responsibility centres which are accountable for
       generation of revenue for the entity. Sales Department for example, is
       responsible for achievement of sales target and revenue generation.
       Though, revenue centres do not have control on expenditures it incurs but
       sometimes expenditures related with selling activities like commission to
       sales person etc. are incurred by revenue centres.

(iii) Profit Centres: These are the responsibility centres which have both
       responsibility of generation of revenue and incurrence of expenditures. Since,
       managers of profit centres are accountable for both costs as well as
       revenue, profitability is the basis for measurement of performance of these
       responsibility centres. Examples of profit centres are decentralised branches
       of an organisation.

(iv) Investment Centres: These are the responsibility centres which are not only
       responsible for profitability but also have the authority to make capital

       investment decisions. The performance of these responsibility centres are
       measured on the basis of Return on Investment (ROI) besides profit.
       Examples of investment centres are Maharatna, Navratna and Miniratna
       companies of Public Sector Undertakings of Central Government.

     12. LIMITATIONS OF COST ACCOUNTING

Like other branches of accounting, cost accounting also has certain limitations.
The limitations of cost accounting are as follows:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.24  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

1. Expensive: It is expensive because analysis, allocation and absorption of
       overheads requires considerable amount of additional work, and hence
       additional money.

2. Requirement of reconciliation: The results shown by cost accounts differ
       from those shown by financial accounts. Thus preparation of reconciliation
       statements is necessary to verify their accuracy.

3. Duplication of work: It involves duplication of work as organization has to
       maintain two sets of accounts i.e. Financial Accounts and Cost Accounts.

     13. CLASSIFICATION OF COSTS

It means the grouping of costs according to their common characteristics. The
important ways of classification of costs are:
(i) By Nature or Element
(ii) By Functions
(iii) By Variability or Behaviour
(iv) By Controllability
(v) By Normality
(vi) By Costs for Managerial Decision Making

13.1 By Nature or Element

Under this type of classification of cost, total cost of a cost object is classified on
the basis of element of cost i.e., material, labour, other expenses and overheads.
A diagram as given below shows the elements of cost described as under:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                                1.12.525
                                              ACCOUNTING

                                        ELEMENTS OF COST

Material Cost                       Employee (Labour) Cost         Other Expenses

Direct Material  Indirect Material       Direct        Indirect      Direct   Indirect
       Cost              Cost         Employee       Employee      Expenses  Expenses
                                    (Labour) Cost  (Labour) Cost

                                                   Overheads

                                    Production     Administration  Selling and
                                    Overheads
                                                   Overheads Distribution Overheads

(i) Material: Material cost means cost of raw material required to make a
       product into finished goods. The materials can be directly attributable to a
       cost object or allocable on some reasonable basis where direct attribution is
       not possible. Materials which are present in the finished product (cost
       object) or can be economically identified in the product are termed as direct
       materials. For example, cloth in dress making; materials purchased for a
       specific job etc. However, in some cases a material may be direct but it is
       treated as indirect; because it is used in small quantities, it is not
       economically feasible to identify that quantity. Those materials which are
       used for purposes ancillary to the business are also treated as Indirect
       Materials.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.26  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(ii) Labour: Wages paid to workers for converting the raw materials into
       finished goods, is called labour cost/ labour which can be economically
       identified or attributed wholly to a cost object is termed as direct labour. For
       example, employee engaged on the actual production of the product or in
       carrying out the necessary operations for converting the raw materials into
       finished product.

(iii) Other Expenses: All expenses other than material or labour which are
       incurred for a particular cost object are termed as other Expenses. For
       example, hire charges for some special machinery, cost of defective work
       etc.

(iv) Overheads: The aggregate of indirect material costs, indirect labour costs
       and indirect expenses is termed as Overheads. The main groups into which
       overheads may be subdivided are as follows:

       · Production or Works Overheads: Indirect expenses which are
               incurred in the factory and for the running of the factory. E.g.: rent,
               power etc.

       · Administration Overheads: Indirect expenses related to management
               and administration of business. E.g.: office rent, lighting, telephone
               etc.

       · Selling Overheads: Indirect expenses incurred for marketing of a
               commodity. E.g.: Advertisement expenses, commission to sales
               persons etc.

       · Distribution Overheads: Indirect expenses incurred for dispatch of
               the goods E.g.: warehouse charges, packing(secondary) and loading
               charges.

13.2 By Functions

Under this classification, costs are divided according to the function for which
they have been incurred. It includes the following:

(i) Production/ Manufacturing Cost

(ii) Administration Cost

(iii) Selling Cost

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                        1.12.727
                                                   ACCOUNTING

(iv) Distribution Cost

(v) Research and Development cost etc.

The below chart shows the flow of costs in a cost sheet under functional
classification:

Direct Materials

Direct Employees                                               Prime Cost
(Labours)

Direct Expenses

                           Factory Overheads                   Factory Cost or
Indirect Material                                              Works Cost

Indirect Labour

                   Administration Overheads

Indirect Expenses                                              Cost of Goods Sold

                   Selling and Distribution Overheads

                                                               Cost of Sales

13.3 By Variability or Behaviour

Based on this classification, costs are classified into three groups viz., fixed,
variable and semi-variable.

    (a) Fixed costs­ These are the costs which are incurred for a period, and
            which, within certain output and turnover limits, tend to be unaffected
            by fluctuations in the levels of activity (output or turnover). They do not
            tend to increase or decrease with the changes in output. For example,
            rent, insurance of factory building etc., remain the same for different
            levels of production.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                       1.28       COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

                                  Fixed Cost

Cost (`)  40000
          35000
          30000                   Fixed Cost
          25000
          20000              100  200              300                400  500  600
          15000
          10000

           5000
                 0
                    0

                                                   Output (in units)

(b) Variable Costs­ These costs tend to vary with the volume of activity. Any
       increase in the activity results in an increase in the variable cost and vice-
       versa. For example, cost of direct material, cost of direct labour, etc.

                                  Variable Cost

Cost (`)  60000
          50000
          40000              100  200              300                400  500  600
          30000
          20000
          10000

                0

                  0

                                                   Output (in units)

(c) Semi-variable costs­ These costs contain both fixed and variable
       components and are thus partly affected by fluctuations in the level of
       activity. Examples of semi variable costs are telephone bills, gas and
       electricity etc. Such costs are depicted graphically as follows:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                                   1.12.929
                                              ACCOUNTING

13.3.1 Methods of segregating Semi-variable costs into fixed and
variable costs

                              Semi- Variable Cost

Cost (`)  100000
           80000
           60000         100                       200  300  400      500       600
           40000
           20000
                  0
                      0

                                                   Output (in units)

The segregation of semi-variable costs into fixed and variable costs can be carried
out by using the following methods:

(a) Graphical method

(b) High-Low method
(c) Analytical method
(d) Comparison by period or level of activity method
(e) Least squares method
(a) Graphical Method: Under this method, the following steps are followed:

       (i) A large number of observations regarding the total costs at different
               levels of output are plotted on a graph.

       (ii) The output is plotted on the X-axis and the total cost is plotted on the Y-
               axis.

       (iii) Then, by judgment, a line of "best-fit", which passes through all or most
               of the points, is drawn.

       (iv) The point at which this line cuts the Y-axis indicates the total fixed cost
               component in the total cost.

       (v) If a line is drawn at this point parallel to the X-axis, this indicates the fixed
               cost.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.30  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(vi) The variable cost, at any level of output, is derived by deducting this fixed
       cost element from the total cost.

The following graph illustrates this:

                                                   Fixed Overheads Line

(b) High- Low Method: Under this method, difference between the total cost
       at highest and lowest volume is divided by the difference between the sales
       value at the highest and lowest volume. The quotient thus obtained gives us
       the rate of variable cost in relation to sales value.

       ILLUSTRATION 1: (Segregation of fixed cost and variable cost)

                                                   Sales value Total cost

                                                                         (`)     (`)

  At the Highest volume                            1,40,000                      72,000
  At the Lowest volume
                                                                         80,000  60,000
Thus, Variable Cost (` 12,000/` 60,000)
                                                                         60,000  12,000

= 1/5 or 20% of sales value = ` 28,000 (at highest volume)

Fixed Cost ` 72,000 ­ ` 28,000 i.e., (20% of ` 1,40,000) = ` 44,000.

Alternatively, ` 60,000 ­ ` 16,000 (20% of ` 80,000) = ` 44,000.

(c) Analytical Method: Under this method an experienced cost accountant
       tries to judge empirically what proportion of the semi-variable cost would
       be variable and what would be fixed. The degree of variability is ascertained

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.13.131
                                              ACCOUNTING

for each item of semi-variable expenses. For example, some semi-variable
expenses may vary to the extent of 20% while others may vary to the extent
of 80%. Although it is very difficult to estimate the extent of variability of an
expense, the method is easy to apply. (Go through the following illustration
for clarity).

ILLUSTRATION 2: (Segregation of fixed cost and variable cost)

       Suppose last month the total semi-variable expenses amounted to ` 3,000.

       If the degree of variability is assumed to be 70%, then variable cost = 70%
       of ` 3,000 = ` 2,100.

       Fixed cost = ` 3,000 ­ ` 2,100 = ` 900.

       Now in the future months, the fixed cost will remain constant, but the
       variable cost will vary according to the change in production volume.

       Thus, if in the next month production increases by 50%, the total semi-
       variable expenses will be:

       Fixed cost of ` 900, plus variable cost viz., ` 3,150 i.e., (` 2,100 (V.C.) plus
       50% increase of V.C. i.e., ` 1,050) =, ` 4,050.

(d) Comparison by period or level of activity method: Under this method,
       the variable overhead may be determined by comparing two levels of
       output with the amount of expenses at those levels. Since the fixed element
       does not change, the variable element may be ascertained with the help of
       the following formula.
                                Change in the amount of expense
                                 Change in the quantity of output

Suppose the following information is available:

January     Production Units                              Semi-variable expenses
February                                                                (`)
Difference            100                                               260
                      140                                               300
                      40                                                40

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           1.32           COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

The variable cost:

Change in  Semi-variable  expenses                 =    `  40     =  `  1/unit
  Change   in production  volume                      40   units

Thus, in January, the variable cost will be 100 × ` 1 = ` 100

The fixed cost element will be (` 260 ­ ` 100) or ` 160.

In February, the variable cost will be 140 × ` 1 = ` 140

whereas the fixed cost element will remain the same, i.e., ` 160.

(e) Least Square Method: This is the best method to segregate semi-variable
       costs into its fixed and variable components. This is a statistical method and is
       based on finding out a line of best fit for a number of observations.

The method uses the linear equation y = mx + c, where

`m' represents the variable element of cost per unit,

`c' represents the total fixed cost,

`y' represents the total cost,

`x' represents the volume of output.

The total cost is thus split into its fixed and variable elements by solving this
equation.

ILLUSTRATION 3: (Segregation of fixed cost and variable cost)

                                                                                Level of activity

Capacity %                                                                      60% 80%
Volume (Labour hours) or `x'
Semi-variable expenses (maintenance of plant) or `y'                            150  200

                                                                                ` 1,200 ` 1,275

Substituting the values of `x' and `y' in the equation, y = mx + c, at both the
levels of activity, we get

       1,200 = 150 m + c
       1,275 = 200 m + c
On solving the above equations, we get the value of `c'
Fixed cost or `c' = ` 975 and Variable cost or `m' = ` 1.50 per labour hour.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                        1.13.333
                                                   ACCOUNTING

13.4 By Controllability

Costs here may be classified into controllable and uncontrollable costs.

(a) Controllable Costs: - Cost that can be controlled, typically by a cost, profit
       or investment centre manager is called controllable cost. Controllable costs
       incurred in a particular responsibility centre can be influenced by the action
       of the manager heading that responsibility centre. For example, direct costs
       comprising direct labour, direct material, direct expenses and some of the
       overheads are generally controllable by the shop floor supervisor or the
       factory manager.

(b) Uncontrollable Costs - Costs which cannot be influenced by the action of a
       specified member of an undertaking are known as uncontrollable costs. For
       example, expenditure incurred by say, the tool room is controllable by the
       foreman in-charge of that section but the share of the tool-room
       expenditure which is apportioned to a machine shop is not controlled by
       the machine shop foreman.

Distinction between Controllable Cost and Uncontrollable Cost: The
distinction between controllable and uncontrollable costs is not very prominent
and is sometimes left to individual judgement. In fact, no cost is uncontrollable; it
is only in relation to a particular individual that we may specify a particular cost to
be either controllable or uncontrollable.

13.5 By Normality

According to this basis, cost may be categorised as follows:

(a) Normal Cost - It is the cost which is normally incurred at a given level of
       output under the conditions in which that level of output is normally
       attained.

(b) Abnormal Cost - It is the cost which is not normally incurred at a given
       level of output in the conditions in which that level of output is normally
       attained. It is charged to Costing Profit and loss Account.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.34  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

13.6 By Costs used in Managerial Decision Making

According to this basis, cost may be categorised as follows:

(a) Pre-determined Cost - A cost which is computed in advance before produc-
       tion or operations start, on the basis of specification of all the factors
       affecting cost, is known as a pre-determined cost.

(b) Standard Cost - A pre-determined cost, which is calculated from
       managements `expected standard of efficient operation' and the relevant
       necessary expenditure. It may be used as a basis for price fixation and for
       cost control through variance analysis.

(c) Marginal Cost - The amount at any given volume of output by which
       aggregate costs increases if the volume of output is increased or decreased
       by one unit.

(d) Estimated Cost - Kohler defines estimated cost as "the expected cost of
       manufacture, or acquisition, often in terms of a unit of product computed
       on the basis of information available in advance of actual production or
       purchase". Estimated costs are prospective costs since they refer to
       prediction of costs.

(e) Differential Cost - (Incremental and decremental costs). It represents the
       change (increase or decrease) in total cost (variable as well as fixed) due to
       change in activity level, technology, process or method of production, etc.
       For example, if any change is proposed in the existing level or in the
       existing method of production, the increase or decrease in total cost or in
       specific elements of cost as a result of this decision will be known as
       incremental cost or decremental cost.

(f) Imputed Costs - These costs are notional costs which do not involve any
       cash outlay. Interest on capital, the payment for which is not actually made,
       is an example of imputed cost. These costs are similar to opportunity costs.

(g) Capitalized Costs -These are costs which are initially recorded as assets and
       subsequently treated as expenses. Example, installation expenses on the
       erection of a machine are added to the cost of a machine.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.13.535
                                              ACCOUNTING

(h) Product Costs - These are the costs which are associated with the purchase
       and sale of goods (in the case of merchandise inventory). In the production
       scenario, such costs are associated with the acquisition and conversion of
       materials and all other manufacturing inputs into finished product for sale.
       Hence, under marginal costing, variable manufacturing costs and under
       absorption costing, total manufacturing costs (variable and fixed) constitute
       inventoriable or product costs.

(i) Opportunity Cost - This cost refers to the value of sacrifice made or benefit
       of opportunity foregone in accepting an alternative course of action. For
       example, a firm financing its expansion plan by withdrawing money from its
       bank deposits. In such a case the loss of interest on the bank deposit is the
       opportunity cost for carrying out the expansion plan.

(j) Out-of-pocket Cost - It is that portion of total cost, which involves cash
       outflow. This cost concept is a short-run concept and is used in decisions
       relating to fixation of selling price in recession, make or buy, etc. Out­of­
       pocket costs can be avoided or saved if a particular proposal under
       consideration is not accepted.

(k) Shut down Costs - Those costs, which continue to be, incurred even when a
       plant is temporarily shut-down e.g. rent, rates, depreciation, etc. These costs
       cannot be eliminated with the closure of the plant. In other words, all fixed
       costs, which cannot be avoided during the temporary closure of a plant, will be

       known as shut down costs.

(l) Sunk Costs - Historical costs incurred in the past are known as sunk costs.
       They play no role in decision making in the current period. For example, in
       the case of a decision relating to the replacement of a machine, the written
       down value of the existing machine is a sunk cost and therefore, not
       considered.

(m) Absolute Cost - These costs refer to the cost of any product, process or unit in
       its totality. When costs are presented in a statement form, various cost
       components may be shown in absolute amount or as a percentage of total
       cost or as per unit cost or all together. Here the costs depicted in absolute
       amount may be called absolute costs and are base costs on which further
       analysis and decisions are made.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               1.36  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

(n) Discretionary Costs ­ Such costs are not tied to a clear cause and effect
       relationship between inputs and outputs. They usually arise from periodic
       decisions regarding the maximum outlay to be incurred. Examples include
       advertising, public relations, executive training etc.

(o) Period Costs - These are the costs, which are not assigned to the products
       but are charged as expenses against the revenue of the period in which they
       are incurred. All non-manufacturing costs such as general & administrative
       expenses, selling and distribution expenses are recognised as period costs.

(p) Engineered Costs - These are costs that result specifically from a clear
       cause and effect relationship between inputs and outputs. The relationship is
       usually personally observable. Examples of inputs are direct material costs,
       direct labour costs etc. Examples of output are cars, computers etc.

(q) Explicit Costs - These costs are also known as out-of-pocket costs and refer
       to costs involving immediate payment of cash. salaries, wages, postage and
       telegram, printing and stationery, interest on loan etc. are some examples of
       explicit costs involving immediate cash payment.

(r) Implicit Costs - These costs do not involve any immediate cash payment. They
       are not recorded in the books of account. They are also known as economic
       costs.

     14. METHODS OF COSTING

Different industries follow different methods of costing because of the differences
in the nature of their work. The various methods of costing are as follows:

Methods                                            Description

Single or Output Under this method, the cost of a product is ascertained, the

Costing              product being the only one produced like bricks, coals, etc.

Batch Costing        This method is the extension of job costing. A batch may
                     represent a number of small orders passed through the
                     factory in batch. Each batch here is treated as a unit of cost
                     and thus separately costed. Here cost per unit is
                     determined by dividing the cost of the batch by the number
                     of units produced in the batch.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                             1.13.737
                                              ACCOUNTING

Job Costing       Under this method of costing, cost of each job is
                  ascertained separately. It is suitable in all cases where work
                  is undertaken on receiving a customer's order like a
                  printing press, motor workshop, etc.

Contract Costing  Under this method, the cost of each contract is ascertained
                  separately. It is suitable for firms engaged in the
                  construction of bridges, roads, buildings etc.

Process Costing   Under this method, the cost of completing each stage of
                  work is ascertained, like cost of making pulp and cost of
                  making paper from pulp. In mechanical operations, the cost
                  of each operation may be ascertained separately; the name
                  given is operation costing.

Operating Costing It is used in the case of concerns rendering services like
                              transport, supply of water, retail trade etc.

Multiple Costing  It is a combination of two or more methods of costing
                  outlined above. Suppose a firm manufactures bicycles
                  including its components; the parts will be costed by the
                  system of job or batch costing but the cost of assembling
                  the bicycle will be computed by the single or output
                  costing method. The whole system of costing is known as
                  multiple costing.

The following table summarises the various methods of costing applied in
different industries:

Nature of Output          Method                          Cost  Examples of
                                                                 Industries
A Series of Processes     Process costing          For each
Construction of building  or Operation             process      Sugar
                          Costing
                                                   For each     Real estate
                          Contract                 contract
                          Costing

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         1.38              COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

Similar units of a Single  Unit or output                  For the entire  Cold Drinks
Product, produced by                                       activity, but
Single Process             or                      Single  averaged for
                                                           the output
                           Costing

Rendering of Services      Operating                       For all services Hospitals
                           Costing

Customer Specifications: Job Costing                       For each order/ Advertising
single Unit                                                assignment/job

Consisting of multiple Multiple                            Combination of Car
varieties of activities and Costing
processes                                                  any method      Assembly

Industries also follows Activity Based Costing which is an accounting
methodology that assigns costs to activities rather than products or services. ABC
is a technique which involves identification of cost with each cost driving activity
and making it as the basis for apportionment of costs over different cost objects/
jobs/ products/customers or services.

15. TECHNIQUES OF COSTING

For ascertaining cost, following types of costing are usually used.

Techniques                                         Description

Uniform        When a number of firms in an industry agree among
Costing        themselves to follow the same system of costing in details,
               adopting common terminology for various items and proc-
               esses they are said to follow a system of uniform costing.

               Advantages of such a system are:

               (i) A comparison of the performance of each of the firms
                    can be made with that of another, or with the average
                    performance in the industry.

               (ii) Under such a system, it is also possible to determine
                    the cost of production of goods which is true for the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.13.939
                                              ACCOUNTING

            industry as a whole. It is found useful when tax-relief or
            protection is sought from the Government.

Marginal    It is defined as the ascertainment of marginal cost by
Costing     differentiating between fixed and variable costs. It is used to
            ascertain effect of changes in volume or type of output on profit.

Standard           It is the name given to the technique whereby standard
Costing     and costs are pre-determined and subsequently compared with
Variance
Analysis           the recorded actual costs. It is thus a technique of cost
                   ascertainment and cost control. This technique may be used
                   in conjunction with any method of costing. However, it is
                   especially suitable where the manufacturing method
                   involves production of standardised goods of repetitive
                   nature.

Historical  It is the ascertainment of costs after they have been
Costing     incurred. This type of costing has limited utility.

            · Post Costing : It means ascertainment of cost after
                  production is completed.

            · Continuous costing : Cost is ascertained as soon as the
                  job is completed or even when the job is in progress.

Absorption  It is the practice of charging all costs, both variable and
Costing     fixed to operations, processes or products. This differs from
            marginal costing where fixed costs are excluded.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.40  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

SUMMARY

 Cost:

        The amount of expenditure (actual or notional) incurred on or
               attributable to a specified article, product or activity. (as a noun)

        To ascertain the cost of a specified thing or activity. (as a verb)

 Costing: It is the technique and process of ascertaining costs.

 Cost Accounting: It is the process of accounting for cost which begins with
       the recording of income and expenditure or the bases on which they are
       calculated and ends with the preparation of periodical statements and
       reports for ascertaining and controlling costs.

 Cost Accountancy: It has been defined as "the application of costing and
       cost accounting principles, methods and techniques to the science, art and
       practice of cost control and the ascertainment of profitability. It includes the
       presentation of information derived there from for the purpose of
       managerial decision making."

 Management Accounting: As per CIMA Official Terminology "Management
       Accounting is the application of the principles of accounting and financial
       management to create, protect, preserve and increase value for the
       stakeholders of for-profit and not-for-profit enterprises in the public and
       private sectors."

 Cost Management: It is an application of management accounting
       concepts, methods of collections, analysis and presentation of data to
       provide the information needed to plan, monitor and control costs.

 Cost Control: Maintaining discipline in expenditure is one of the main
       objective of a good cost and management accounting system. It ensures
       that expenditures are in consonance with predetermined set standard and
       any variation from these set standards is noted and reported on continuous
       basis.

 Cost Reduction: It may be defined "as the achievement of real and
       permanent reduction in the unit cost of goods manufactured or services
       rendered without impairing their suitability for the use intended or
       diminution in the quality of the product."

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                       1.14.141
                                              ACCOUNTING

 Cost Objects: Cost object is anything for which a separate measurement of
       cost is required. Cost object may be a product, a service, a project, a
       customer, a brand category, an activity, a department or a programme etc.

 Cost Units: It is a unit of product, service or time (or combination of these)
       in relation to which costs may be ascertained or expressed.

 Cost Drivers: A Cost driver is a factor or variable which effect level of cost.
       Generally, it is an activity which is responsible for cost incurrence. Level of
       activity or volume of production is the example of a cost driver. An activity
       may be an event, task, or unit of work etc.

 Responsibility Centres: To have a better control over the organisation,
       management delegates its responsibility and authority to various
       departments or persons. These departments or persons are known as
       responsibility centres and are held responsible for performance in terms of
       expenditure, revenue, profitability and return on investment.

 Cost Centres: The responsibility centre which is held accountable for
       incurrence of costs which are under its control. The performance of this
       responsibility centre is measured against pre-determined standards or
       budgets.

 Revenue Centres: The responsibility centres which are accountable for
       generation of revenue for the entity.

 Profit Centres: These are the responsibility centres which have both
       responsibility of generating revenue and incurrence of expenditures. Since,
       managers of profit centres are accountable for both costs as well as
       revenue, profitability is the basis for measurement of performance of these
       responsibility centres.

 Investment Centres: These are the responsibility centres which are not only
       responsible for profitability but also has the authority to make capital
       investment decisions. The performance of these responsibility centres are
       measured on the basis of Return on Investment (ROI) besides profit.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  1.42                  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

 Classification of Costs:

                                        Classification of Costs

By Nature or      By Functions          By Variability          By          By Normality      By Costs for
   Element                              or Behaviour    Controllability                       Managerial
                    Direct Material                                                       Decision Making*
       Materials            Cost            Fixed Cost
                                                         Controllable       Normal Cost
         Labour    Direct Employee           Variable          Cost
                     (Labour) Cost              Cost                         Abnormal
          Other                                         Uncontrollable           Cost
       Expenses     Direct Expenses            Semi-           Cost
                                              variable
      Overheads       Production/
                    Manufacturing               Cost

                       Overheads

                     Administration
                        Overheads

                     Selling Overheads

                       Distribution
                        Overheads

                      Research and
                  Development costs

                             etc.

     By Costs for       Opportunity Cost                Out-of-pocket Cost    Implicit Cost
     Managerial            Product Cost                   Shut down Cost      Explicit Cost
 Decision Making*                                             Sunk Cost     Engineered Cost
                        Capitalized Cost                   Absolute Cost       Period Cost
Pre-determined Cost       Imputed Cost
                                                        Discretionary Cost
    Standard Cost       Differential Cost

    Marginal Cost

    Estimated Cost

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                        1.14.343
                                                   ACCOUNTING

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs)

1. .................... is anything for which a separate measurement is required.
       (a) Cost unit
       (b) Cost object
       (c) Cost driver
       (d) Cost centre

2. Which of the following is true about Cost control:
       (a) It is a corrective function
       (b) It challenges the set standards
       (c) It ends when targets achieved
       (d) It is concerned with future

3. Cost units used in power sector is:
       (a) Kilometer (K.M)
       (b) Kilowatt-hour (kWh)
       (c) Number of electric points
       (d) Number of hours

4. Process Costing method is suitable for
       (a) Transport sector
       (b) Chemical industries
       (c) Dam construction
       (d) Furniture making

5. Which of the following is Not true about the cost control and cost reduction:
       (a) Cost control seeks to attain lowest possible cost under best conditions.
       (b) Cost control emphasises on past and present.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.44  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

       (c) Cost reduction is a corrective function. It operates even when an efficient
               cost control system exists.

       (d) Cost control ends when targets are achieved.
6. The advantage of using IT in Cost Accounting does not include:

       (a) Integration of various functions
       (b) Stock needs to be reconciled with Goods Received Note
       (c) Reduction in multicity of documents
       (d) Customised reports can be prepared.
7. A taxi provider charges minimum ` 80 thereafter ` 12 per kilometer of distance
       travelled, the behaviour of conveyance cost is:
       (a) Fixed Cost
       (b) Semi-variable Cost
       (c) Variable Cost
       (d) Administrative cost.
8. A Ltd. has three production department, and each department has two machines,
       which of the following cannot be treated as cost centre for cost allocation:
       (a) Machines under the production department
       (b) Production departments
       (c) Both Production department and machines
       (d) A Ltd.
9. Which of the following is an example of functional classification of cost:
       (a) Direct Material Cost
       (b) Fixed Cost
       (c) Administrative Overheads
       (d) Indirect Overheads.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INTRODUCTION TO COST AND MANAGEMENT                                  1.14.545
                                                   ACCOUNTING

10. Ticket counter in a Railway Station is an example of
       (a) Cost Centre
       (b) Revenue Centre
       (c) Profit Centre
       (d) Investment Centre

Theoretical Questions

1. DESCRIBE the main objectives of introduction of a Cost and Management
       Accounting System in a manufacturing organization.

2. DISCUSS the different cost centres that on organization can have.

3. DISCUSS cost classification based on variability and controllability.

4. DISCUSS the essential features of a good cost accounting system.

5. DESCRIBE the factors which are to be considered before installing a system of
       cost accounting.

6. DISCUSS the four different methods of costing along with their applicability to
       concerned industry.

7. STATE the method of costing and the suggested unit of cost for the following
       industries:

(a) Transport         (b) Power                                (c) Hotel

(d) Hospital          (e) Steel                                (f) Coal

(g) Bicycles          (h) Bridge Construction (i) Interior Decoration

(j) Advertising       (k) Furniture                            (l) Brick-works

8. WRITE a note on the following, indicating in which kinds of industries or
       undertakings, the different methods could be suitably applied:

(a) Single or Output Costing                       (b) Batch Costing

(c) Process Costing                                (d) Operating Costing

(e) Contract Costing                               (f) Multiple Costing

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.46  COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING

ANSWERS

Answers to the MCQs

1. (b) 2. (c) 3. (b) 4. (b) 5. (a) 6. (b)
7. (b) 8. (d) 9. (c) 10. (b)

Answers to the Theoretical Questions

1. Please refer paragraph 2
2. Please refer paragraph 11
3. Please refer paragraph 13
4. Please refer paragraph 7
5. Please refer paragraph 8
6. Please refer paragraph 14
7. Please refer paragraph 14 & 10
8. Please refer paragraph 14

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
