CHAPTER  a  9

INCOME TAX
LIABILITY -
COMPUTATION AND
OPTIMISATION

                                   LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to­

 compute the tax liability of an individual under the default tax regime
       under section 115BAC;

 compute the tax liability of an individual as per the regular provisions
       of the Income-tax Act, 1961;

 examine the applicability of the provisions of Alternate Minimum Tax
       (AMT), if applicable and compute the tax liability applying such
       provisions and determine the tax credit, if any, to be carried forward;

 compare the tax liability computed under the default tax regime under
       section 115BAC with the tax liability under the regular provisions of the
       Act (including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable) and determine
       which is more beneficial to the individual.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a         9.2             INCOME TAX LAW

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

                           COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME

               Determination of residential status

               Classification of Income under
                              5 heads

Salaries   Income from    Profits and gains        Capital          Income from
          house property   of business or           gains           other sources
                              profession

                Compute income under each head applying the
               charging & deeming provisions and providing for
                permissible deductions/exemptions thereunder

                          Apply the clubbing provisions

                               Set-off/carry forward and
                set-off of losses as per the provisions of the Act

                          Compute Gross Total Income (GTI)

                 Less: Deductions from Gross Total Income

                                  Total Income (TI)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                      9.3                       a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

1. MEANING OF TOTAL INCOME

The total income of an individual is arrived at after making deductions under
Chapter VI-A from the Gross Total Income. As we have learnt earlier, Gross Total
Income is the aggregate of the income computed under the 5 heads of income,
after giving effect to the provisions for clubbing of income and set-off and carry
forward & set-off of losses.

2. INCOME TO                                       BE CONSIDERED WHILE
      COMPUTING
      INDIVIDUALS                                  TOTAL  INCOME                       OF

 Capacity in which   Treatment of income earned in each capacity
income is earned by

     an individual

(1) In his personal Income from salaries, Income from house property,

capacity (under the 5 Profits and gains of business or profession, Capital

heads of income)     gains and Income from other sources.

(2) As a partner of a (i) Salary, bonus etc. received by a partner is

firm/LLP                                           taxable as his business income.

                     (ii) Interest on capital and/or loans to the
                            firm/LLP is taxable as business income of the
                            partner.

                     The income mentioned in (i) and (ii) above are
                     taxable to the extent they are allowed as
                     deduction to the firm.

                     (iii) Share of profit in the firm is exempt in the
                            hands of the partner [Section 10(2A)]. The
                            profit credited to the partners' accounts in the
                            firm would be exempt from tax in the hands
                            of such partners, even if the income
                            chargeable to tax becomes Nil in the hands of
                            the firm on account of any exemption or
                            deduction available under the provisions of
                            the Act [Circular No. 8/2014 dated
                            31.03.2014].

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.4                  INCOME TAX LAW

(3) As a member of HUF  (i) Share of income of HUF is exempt in the
                               hands of the member [Section 10(2)].

                        (ii) Income from an impartible estate of HUF is
                               taxable in the hands of the holder of the
                               estate who is the eldest member of the HUF.

                        (iii) Income from self-acquired property
                               converted into joint family property, without
                               adequate consideration.

(4) Income of other (i)                            Transferee's income, where there is a
                                                   transfer of income without transfer of assets
      persons included in
                                                   Income arising to transferee from a
      the income of the (ii)                       revocable transfer of an asset.
      individual

                        In cases (i) and (ii), income is includible in the
                        hands of the transferor.

                        (iii) Income of spouse as mentioned in section
                               64(1)(ii)/(iv)

                        (iv) Income from assets transferred otherwise
                               than for adequate consideration to any
                               person for the benefit of spouse [Section
                               64(1)(vii)].

                        (v) Income from assets transferred otherwise
                               than for adequate consideration to son's
                               wife or to any person for the benefit of son's
                               wife [Section 64(1)(vi)/(viii)].

                        (vi) Income of minor child as mentioned in
                               section 64(1A).

    3. COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME AND TAX
          PAYABLE BY AN INDIVIDUAL

Income-tax is levied on an assessee's total income. Such total income has to be
computed as per the provisions contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. Steps 1 to
8 given hereunder have to be followed for computing total income of an
individual assessee. Thereafter, steps 9 to 15 have to be followed for computing
the tax payable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                     9.5  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Step 1 ­ Determination of residential status

 The residential status of an individual has to be determined to ascertain
       which income is to be included in computing the total income.

 In the case of an individual, the duration for which he is present in
       India in the relevant previous year or relevant previous year and the
       earlier previous years, as the case may be, determine his residential
       status.

 An individual can be either a ­

- Resident and ordinarily resident

- Resident but not ordinarily resident

- Non-resident

 An individual who is a citizen of India, having total income, other than the
       income from foreign sources, exceeding ` 15 lakh during the previous year,
       would be deemed resident in India in that previous year, if he is not liable to
       tax in any other country or territory by reason of his domicile or residence or
       any other criteria of similar nature. Such deemed resident would, by default,
       be a resident but not ordinarily resident in India in that previous year.

 The residential status of an individual determines the scope of his taxable
       income.

 For example, income which accrues outside India and is received outside
       India is taxable in the hands of a resident and ordinarily resident but is not
       taxable in the case of a non-resident. In the case of a resident but not
       ordinarily resident, such income would be taxable only if it is derived from a
       business controlled in India or profession set up in India.

Step 2 ­ Classification of income under different heads

 An individual may earn income from different sources. Under the Income-
       tax Act, 1961, for computation of total income, all income of an individual
       assessee can be classified into five different heads of income.

 There are five heads of income, namely, -

- Salaries,

- Income from house property,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.6  INCOME TAX LAW

       - Profits and gains of business or profession

       - Capital Gains

       - Income from other sources

 The income of an assessee should be identified and grouped under the
       respective head of income.

 Each head of income has a charging section (for example, section 15 for
       salaries, section 22 for income from house property).

 Deeming provisions are also contained under certain heads, by which
       specific items are sought to be taxed under those heads.

       For example, unrealized rent and arrears of rent from house property would
       be deemed to be income from house property in the hands of the recipient
       individual even if he is not the owner of the house property at the time of
       receipt of such amount.

 The charging section and the deeming provisions would help you to
       determine the scope of income chargeable under a particular head.

Step 3 ­ Computation of income under each head

 Income is to be computed in accordance with the provisions governing a
       particular head of income.

 Assess the income under each head by -

       - applying the charging and deeming provisions,

       - excluding items of income relating to that head in respect of which
               specific exemptions are provided in section 10.

               There are certain incomes which are wholly exempt from income-tax.
               These incomes have to be excluded and will not form part of Gross
               Total Income. For e.g. agricultural income which is exempt under both
               the tax regimes.

               Also, some incomes are partially exempt from income-tax. These
               incomes are excluded while computing income under the relevant
               head only to the extent of the limits specified in the Act. For e.g. House
               Rent Allowance, Children Education Allowance are exempt upto
               prescribed limits under the optional tax regime as per normal provisions

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                     9.7  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

of the Act. However, there is no exemption for these allowances under
the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

- allowing the permissible deductions under that head, and

For example, while calculating income from house property of a
rented house property, municipal taxes paid by the owner and interest
on loan are allowed as deduction. Standard deduction of upto
` 50,000 (under optional regime) and ` 75,000 (under default regime)
is allowed under salaries. Similarly, deductions and allowances are
prescribed under other heads of income.

- disallowing the non-permissible deductions.

For example, while computing income under the head "Profits and
gains from business or profession" expenditure of personal nature and
expenditure which is in the nature of offence are not allowable as
deduction. Hence, such expenditure, if any, debited to profits and loss
account, has to be added back while computing income under this
head.

Likewise, while computing net consideration for capital gains,
brokerage is a permissible deduction from gross sale consideration
but securities transaction tax paid is not permissible.

 In this step, it is necessary to consider whether the individual is paying tax
       under the default tax regime or exercising the option to shift out of the
       default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the
       normal provisions of the Act. Certain deductions which are allowable under
       the normal provisions of the Act are not permissible under the default tax
       regime, for example, additional depreciation, investment linked tax
       deduction under section 35AD, contribution to scientific research
       association, national laboratory, IIT etc. However, expenditure on in-house
       scientific research related to the business of the assessee is allowable as
       deduction under both the tax regimes.

Step 4 ­ Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.

 An individual in a higher tax bracket may have a tendency to divert his
       income to another person who is not subject to tax or who is in a lower tax
       bracket.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.8  INCOME TAX LAW

       For example, an individual may make a fixed deposit in the name of his
       minor son, so that income from such deposit would accrue to his son, who
       does not have any other income.

 In order to prevent evasion of income-tax by such means, clubbing
       provisions have been incorporated in the Income-tax Act, 1961, under which
       income arising to certain persons (like spouse, son's wife etc.) have to be
       included in the income of the person who has diverted his income to such
       persons for the purpose of computing tax liability.

       Further, income of a minor child, not being a minor child suffering from any
       disability of the nature specified in section 80U (other than income derived
       from exercise of special skills/talent or manual work done by him) is
       includible in the hands of the parent whose total income is higher before
       including minor's income. Such income will be included in the hands of the
       parent and if that parent has exercised the option to shift out of the default
       tax regime and pays tax under normal provisions of the Act, exemption of
       up to ` 1,500 under section 10(32) would be provided from that income.

Step 5 ­ Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses

An individual may have different sources of income under the same head of
income. He may have profit from one source and loss from the other. Similarly, he
can have loss under one head of income and profits under another head of
income. There are provisions in the Act for allowing inter-source and inter-head
adjustment.

 Inter-source set-off of losses

       - A person may have income from one source and loss from another
               source under the same head of income. For instance, a person may
               have profit from wholesale trade of merchandise and loss from the
               business of plying vehicles.

               The loss of one business can be set-off against the profits of another
               business to arrive at the net income under the head "Profits and gains
               of business or profession". However, loss from speculation business
               can be set-off only against profits from speculation business and not
               any other business.

       - Set-off of loss from one source against income from another source
               within the same head of income is permissible, subject to certain

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.9  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

exceptions, like long-term capital loss cannot be set-off against short-
term capital gains though short-term capital loss can be set-off
against long-term capital gains.

 Inter-head set-off of losses

- Likewise, set-off of loss from one head against income from another
       head is also permissible, subject to certain exceptions, like business
       loss cannot be set-off against salary income; loss under the head
       "Capital Gains" cannot be set-off against any other head of income.

- Loss from house property cannot be set-off against any other head of
       income, if the individual pays tax under the default tax regime under
       section 115BAC.

If the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pays tax under normal provisions of the Act, loss from
house property can be set-off against income under any other head
only to the extent of ` 2 lakhs. The remaining loss from house
property has to be carried forward to the subsequent year to be set-
off against income from house property in that year.

 Carry forward and set-off of losses

- Unabsorbed losses of the current year can be carried forward to the
       next year for set-off only against the respective head of income.

- Here again, if there are any restrictions relating to inter-source set-off,
       the same will apply, like long-term capital loss which is carried forward
       can be set-off only against long-term capital gains and not short-term
       capital gains of a later year.

- The maximum number of years up to which any particular loss can be
       carried forward is also provided under the Act.

For example, business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of 8
assessment years to be set-off against business income. However, loss
from specified business referred to in section 35AD can be carried
forward indefinitely for set-off against profits of any specified
business.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a    9.10            INCOME TAX LAW

It must be noted that loss from an exempt source cannot be set-off against
profits from a taxable source of income.

Example: Share of loss from a partnership firm cannot be set-off against sole
proprietary business income of the partner, since share of income of the firm is

exempt under section 10(2A).

Step 6 ­ Computation of Gross Total Income

 The income computed under each head, after giving effect to the clubbing
       provisions and provisions for set-off and carry forward and set-off of losses,
       have to be aggregated to arrive at the gross total income.

 The process of computing GTI is depicted hereunder -

Add         income   Apply                          Apply the provisions for
                     clubbing                            set-off and carry forward
computed under       provisions                          of losses

each head

Step 7 ­ Deductions from Gross Total Income

Certain deductions are allowable from gross total income to arrive at the total
income. These deductions are contained in Chapter VI-A. These deductions are
allowable if the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act, subject to satisfaction of
the conditions prescribed in the relevant sections.

 Deduction in respect of certain payments, for example,

   Section                         Nature of Payment/Deposit
     80C
            Payment of life insurance premium, tuition fees of children,
            deposit in public provident fund, repayment of housing loan
            etc.

   80D Medical insurance premium paid by an individual/HUF for the
              specified persons/ contribution to CGHS etc.

     80E Payment of interest on educational loan taken for self or
                relative

 Deduction in respect of certain incomes, for example,

   Section                                         Nature of Income

   80QQB Royalty income of authors of certain books other than text books

   80RRB Royalty on patents

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a              9.11  a
                                        AND OPTIMISATION

 Deduction in respect of other incomes

Section                                Nature of Income
 80TTA   Interest on savings account with a bank, co-operative society
         and post office.

80TTB Interest on deposit with a bank, co-operative society and post
             office in case of senior citizens

 Other Deductions

Deduction under section 80U in case of a person with disability

In addition, deduction is also allowable under section 10AA in respect of an
assessee who derives profits and gains from an undertaking which manufactures
or produces articles or things or provides any service in any SEZ on or before
31.3.2021 if the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act.

There are limits in respect of deduction under certain sections. The
payments/incomes are allowable as deduction subject to such limits. For example,
the maximum deduction under section 80RRB is ` 3 lakhs; under section 80TTA is
` 10,000 and under section 80TTB is ` 50,000.

Note - Deduction under section 80CCD(2) [Employer's contribution to pension
scheme of Central Government], section 80CCH(2) [Central Government's
contribution to assessee's account in Agniveer Corpus Fund] and section 80JJAA
would be available even if the eligible assessee pays tax at concessional rates of tax
u/s 115BAC under the default tax regime.

Step 8 ­ Computation of Total income

 The gross total income as reduced by the above deductions under Chapter
       VI-A and section 10AA is the total income.

Total income = GTI ­ Deductions under Chapter VI-A and section 10AA

 It should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10.

 Tax is calculated on the total income of the assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.12  INCOME TAX LAW

Step 9 ­ Application of the rates of tax on the total income in case of an
individual

 Concessional tax rates under default tax regime under section 115BAC
       of the Income-tax Act, 1961

       For individuals, there is a slab rate and basic exemption limit. At present, the
       basic exemption limit is ` 4,00,000 under the default tax regime. The rates of
       tax and level of total income are as under ­

                         Total income (in `)       Rate of Tax
   (i) Upto ` 4,00,000                                   NIL
   (ii) From ` 4,00,001 to ` 8,00,000                    5%
   (iii) From ` 8,00,001 to ` 12,00,000                 10%
   (iv) From ` 12,00,001 to ` 16,00,000                 15%
   (v) From ` 16,00,001 to ` 20,00,000                  20%
   (vi) From ` 20,00,001 to ` 24,00,000                 25%
   (vii) Above ` 24,00,000                              30%

 Tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act under the optional tax
       regime (regular provisions of the Act)

       The slab rates for A.Y. 2026-27 applicable to Individual under normal
       provisions of the Act are as follows:

                             Total income (in `)                Rate of
                                                                  Tax
(i) Upto ` 2,50,000 (below 60 years)                               Nil
(ii) Upto ` 3,00,000 (60 years or above but less than 80 years
                                                                   5%
     and resident in India)
(iii) Upto ` 5,00,000 (above 80 years and resident in India)      20%
` 2,50,001/ ` 3,00,001, as the case may be, to ` 5,00,000 [in     30%
cases (i) and (ii) above, respectively]
` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000
Above ` 10,00,000

 The rates of tax have to be applied on the total income to compute the tax
       liability.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                     9.13  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

 Rates of tax in respect of certain incomes are provided under the Income-
       tax Act, 1961 itself. Slab rates are not applicable under both the tax regimes
       in respect of such incomes. For instance, the rates of tax for long term
       capital gains on certain assets, long term capital gain on other assets,
       certain short term capital gains, winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles,

races and winnings from online games etc. are prescribed in sections 112A,

112, 111A, 115BB and 115BBJ, respectively.

 The special rates of tax have to be applied on the respective component of
       total income and the general slab rates have to be applied on the balance
       of total income as per the tax regime in which he pays tax.

 The unexhausted basic exemption limit can, however, be adjusted against
       long-term capital gains taxable under section 112/112A and short-term
       capital gains taxable under section 111A in case of resident individual in
       both the tax regime.

Step 10 ­ Surcharge/ Rebate under section 87A

Surcharge: Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-
tax. Surcharge is levied as a percentage of income-tax.

In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

The rates of surcharge applicable for A.Y.2026-27, in case the individual assessee
pays tax under default regime under section 115BAC, are as follows:

                   Particulars                           Rate of surcharge
                                                           on income-tax

(i) Where the total income (including dividend income          10%

and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112

and 112A) >` 50 lakhs but  ` 1 crore

(ii) Where total income (including dividend income and         15%

capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and

112A) > ` 1 crore but  ` 2 crore

(iii) Where total income (excluding dividend income and        25%

capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and

112A) > ` 2 crore

The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on       Not exceeding
the portion of dividend income and capital gains                15%
chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included
in total income

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a         9.14           INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) Where total income (including dividend income and          15%

   capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and

   112A) > ` 2 crore in cases not covered under (iii)

   above

In case the assessee exercises the option to shift out of the default regime

The rates of surcharge applicable for A.Y.2026-27, in case the individual assessee
exercises the option to shift out of the default regime, are as follows:

                         Particulars                                Rate of
                                                                surcharge on
                                                                 income-tax

(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and       10%

   capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >

   ` 50 lakhs but  ` 1 crore

(ii) Where total income (including dividend income and capital  15%

   gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1

   crore but  ` 2 crore

(iii) Where total income (excluding dividend income and         25%

   capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >

   ` 2 crore but  ` 5 crore

   The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the           Not
   portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to   exceeding
   tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income
                                                                    15%

(iv) Where total income (excluding dividend income and          37%

   capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >

   ` 5 crore

   The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the           Not
   portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to   exceeding
   tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income
                                                                    15%

(v) Where total income (including dividend income and capital   15%

   gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2

   crore in cases not covered under (iii) and (iv) above

Marginal relief would also be available under both the tax regimes to ensure that
the increase in amount of tax payable (including surcharge) due to increase in
total income of an assessee beyond the prescribed limit should not exceed the
amount of increase in total income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                     9.15  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Rebate under section 87A: Section 87A provides a rebate from the tax payable
by an assessee, being an individual resident in India.

Rebate to resident individual paying tax under default regime u/s 115BAC

(i) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under
       section 115BAC and the total income of such individual does not exceed
       ` 12,00,000, the rebate shall be equal to the amount of income-tax payable
       on his total income for any assessment year or an amount of ` 60,000,
       whichever is less.

(ii) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under
       section 115BAC and the total income of such individual exceeds
       ` 12,00,000 and income-tax payable on such total income exceeds the
       amount by which the total income is in excess of ` 12,00,000, the rebate
       would be as follows.

       Step 1 ­ Total income (-) ` 12 lakhs (A)
       Step 2 - Compute income-tax payable on total income (B)
       Step 3 - If B>A, rebate under section 87A would be a B ­ A.
In both the above situations, rebate shall not exceed the amount of income-tax
computed as per the rates provided in section 115BAC.

Rebate to resident individual paying tax under optional tax regime (normal
provisions of the Act

If total income of such individual does not exceed ` 5,00,000, the rebate shall be
equal to the amount of income-tax payable on the total income for any
assessment year or an amount of ` 12,500, whichever is less.

However, rebate under section 87A is not available in respect of tax payable on
long-term capital gains taxable under section 112A.

Step 11 ­ Health and Education cess (HEC) on Income-tax

The amount of income-tax as increased by the union surcharge, if applicable,
should be further increased by an additional surcharge called the "Health and
Education cess on income-tax", calculated at the rate of 4% of such income-tax
and surcharge, if applicable. Health and education cess is leviable in the case of
all assessees i.e. individuals, HUF, AOP/BOI, firms, local authorities, co-operative
societies and companies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a             9.16  INCOME TAX LAW

It is leviable to fulfill the commitment of the Government to provide and finance
quality health services and universalised quality basic education and secondary
and higher education

Total Tax = Tax on total (+)              Surcharge, at      (+) HEC@
                                       applicable rates, if            4%
Liability of        income at
                                         total income >
an individual applicable rates              ` 50 lakhs,

                                       or

                                (-)    Rebate u/s 87A

Step 12 ­ Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT)

The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains profit-linked and investment-linked
deductions in order to encourage investment in various industries and
infrastructure facilities. Taxpayers who exercise the option to shift out of the
default tax regime under section 115BAC and are eligible to claim such
deductions end up paying no income-tax or marginal income-tax though they are
capable of paying higher taxes. It has to be kept in mind that our Government
also needs regular/consistent inflow of tax, which is one of its major source of
revenue, to fund various expenses for the welfare of the country. Hence, in order
to ensure payment of reasonable tax by such zero-tax paying/marginal-tax paying
entities, the concept of alternate minimum tax has been introduced in the
Income-tax Act, 1961.

Chapter XII-BA contains special provisions for levy of alternate minimum tax in
case of persons other than a company1. Any person other than a company, who
has claimed deduction under any section (other than section 80P) included in
Chapter VI-A under the heading "C ­ Deductions in respect of certain incomes" or
under section 10AA or investment-linked deduction under section 35AD would be
subject to AMT [Section 115JEE(1)].

The provisions of AMT would, however, not be applicable to an individual, HUF,
AOPs, BOIs, whether incorporated or not, or artificial juridical person, if the
adjusted total income of such person does not exceed ` 20 lakh [Section
115JEE(2)].

1 Since in respect of companies, minimum alternate tax (MAT) provisions are applicable, which will be
dealt with at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.17  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Individual/ HUF/ AoP/ BoI and artificial juridical person, paying tax under default
tax regime under section 115BAC, are also not liable to alternate minimum tax
under section 115JC.

Note - At intermediate level, since profit-linked deductions provided under section
80-IA to 80-IE, section 80JJA, 80LA, 80M and 80P have been excluded from the
scope of syllabus by way of Study Guidelines and computation of total income and
tax liability is restricted to individual assessees only, the discussion in relation to
AMT in this chapter is limited with respect to deduction under section 10AA, section
35AD and deduction under section 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB only.

Accordingly, where the regular income-tax payable by a person for a previous
year computed as per the normal provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is less
than the AMT payable for such previous year, the adjusted total income shall be
deemed to be the total income of the person. Such person shall be liable to pay
income-tax on the adjusted total income @18.5% plus surcharge, if applicable,
and HEC @4% [Section 115JC].

"Adjusted total income" would mean the total income before giving effect to
Chapter XII-BA as increased by

(i) the deductions claimed, if any, under section 10AA;

(ii) the deduction claimed under section 35AD, as reduced by the depreciation
       allowable under section 32, as if no deduction under section 35AD was
       allowed in respect of the asset for which such deduction is claimed; and

(iii) deduction under any section included in Chapter VI-A under the heading C-
       Deductions in respect of certain incomes [For Intermediate level, the
       relevant sections are 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB].

Tax credit for AMT [Section 115JD]

Tax credit is the excess of AMT paid over the regular income-tax payable under
the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the year. Such tax credit shall be
carried forward and set-off against income-tax payable in the later year to the
extent of excess of regular income-tax payable under normal the provisions of the
Act over the AMT payable in that year. The balance tax credit, if any, shall be
carried forward to the next year for set-off in that year in a similar manner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.18  INCOME TAX LAW

AMT credit can be carried forward for set-off upto a maximum period of 15
assessment years succeeding the assessment year in which the credit becomes
allowable.

Tax Credit allowable even if Adjusted Total Income does not exceed ` 20 lakh in
the year of set-off [Section 115JEE(3)]

In case where the assessee has not claimed any deduction under section 10AA or
section 35AD or deduction under section 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB in any previous
year and the adjusted total income of that year does not exceed ` 20 lakh, it
would still be entitled to set-off his brought forward AMT credit in that year.

Tax credit not allowable to the assessee paying tax under the default tax
regime

A person who is paying tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC
would not be eligible to claim AMT credit.

Step 13 ­ Examine whether to pay tax under default regime under section
115BAC or pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the regular provisions
of the Act

In case of an assessee not having income from business or profession:

In case of individuals not having income from business or profession, the total
income and tax liability may be computed every year, both in accordance with
default tax regime under section 115BAC and regular provisions of the Act
(including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable), in order to determine which
is more beneficial and accordingly, decide whether or not to shift out of the
default regime under section 115BAC.

In effect, such individual can choose whether or not to exercise the option of
shifting out in each previous year. He may choose to pay tax under default regime
under section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default
tax regime in another year.

In case of an assessee having income from business or profession:

In case of individuals having income from business or profession, the total income
and tax liability may be computed, both in accordance with default tax regime
under section 115BAC and regular provisions of the Act (including provisions
relating to AMT, if applicable), in order to determine which is more beneficial.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.19           a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Such individual has an option to shift out/opt out of the default tax regime under
this section and the option has to be exercised on or before the due date
specified under section 139(1) for furnishing the return of income for such
previous year and once such option is exercised, it would apply to subsequent
assessment years.

Such person who has exercised the above option of shifting out of the default
regime for any previous year shall be able to withdraw such option only once and
pay tax under the default regime under section 115BAC for a previous year other
than the year in which it was exercised.

Thereafter, such person shall never be eligible to exercise option under this
section, except where such person ceases to have any business income

Step 14 ­ Credit for advance tax, TDS and TCS

 Tax is deductible at source at the time of payment of salary, rent, interest,
       fees for professional services, royalty etc.

 The payer has to deduct tax at source at the rates specified in the respective
       sections.

 Such tax deducted at source has to be reduced by the payee to determine
       his net tax liability.

 Tax is collectible by the seller in case of certain goods at the rate specified
       in the respective section. Credit of such tax collection at source is allowable
       to determine the tax liability.

 The Income-tax Act, 1961 also requires payment of advance tax in
       instalments during the previous year itself on the basis of estimated income,
       if the tax payable, after reducing TDS/TCS, is ` 10,000 or more.

 An individual is required to pay advance tax in four instalments, on or
       before 15th June, 15th September, 15th December and 15th March of the
       financial year.

 Assessees declaring profits under presumptive taxation provisions under
       section 44AD or under section 44ADA can, however, pay the entire advance
       tax on or before 15th March of the financial year.

 From the total tax due, deduct the TDS, TCS and advance tax paid for the
       relevant assessment year to arrive at the tax payable.

Tax Payable = Total tax liability ­ TDS ­ TCS - Advance tax paid

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.20  INCOME TAX LAW

Step 15 - Tax Payable/ Tax Refundable

After adjusting the advance tax, tax deducted and collected at source, the
assessee would arrive at the amount of net tax payable or refundable. Such
amount should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10. The assessee has
to pay the amount of tax payable (called self-assessment tax) before or at the
time of filing of the return. Similarly, if any refund is due, assessee will get the same
after filing the return of income.

Note: Students are advised to read the above steps carefully and follow the given
procedure while solving problems on computation of total income and tax liability.

    4. TAX PLANNING IN RESPECT OF SALARY
          INCOME

The definition of salary is very wide and includes not only monetary salary but
also benefits and perquisites in kind. Under the default tax regime under section
115BAC, the only deduction available under section 16 in respect of salary income
is the standard deduction of upto ` 75,000. However, under the optional tax
regime as per normal provisions of the Act, the deductions available under
section 16 in respect of salary income are the standard deduction upto ` 50,000,
deduction for entertainment allowance (only for government employees) and
deduction for professional tax. The following are some of the aspects which can
be considered for tax planning in regard to salary income -

(1) Salary Structure: An employer may plan the salary structure of employees
       keeping in view the deductions and exemptions available under the Act. If
       salary is paid as a consolidated amount, without any break-up, the amount
       of salary after providing standard deduction of upto ` 50,000 (under
       optional regime) and ` 75,000 (under default regime), would become
       taxable without any further exemption and deduction. Therefore, the
       employer may structure the salary by including various allowances and
       perquisites in addition to basic salary, so as to enable the employee to
       optimise his tax liability.

       For example, the employer may include allowances as part of the salary
       structure of the employees for which exemption can be claimed under Rule
       2BB if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
       regime, e.g. Children education allowance, hostel allowance, house rent
       allowance. The employer will get a deduction of all the above amounts paid
       while computing his profits and gains of business or profession.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.21  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Further, if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime, the employer can give such allowances like special compensatory
allowance, border area allowance or remote area allowance or difficult area
allowance or disturbed area allowance depending upon the place of posting
of the employee. Some exemptions are available in respect of these
allowances. In this connection, Rule 2BB specifies the exempt allowances.
The employer has to make a careful study and fix the salary structure in
such a manner that it will include allowances which are exempt.

(2) Employees' welfare schemes: There are several employees' welfare
       schemes such as recognised provident fund, approved superannuation fund,
       gratuity fund. Payments received from such funds by the employees are
       totally exempt or exempt upto significant amounts.

For example, gratuity received by an employee covered under the Payment
of Gratuity Act, 1972 is exempt upto ` 20 lakh. The provident fund received
by the employee from recognised provident fund is exempt, subject to
limits and conditions. The employer can institute such welfare schemes for
the benefit of the employees. Such amount contributed by the employer
towards the above funds is deductible. However, a note of caution is
necessary here in view of the restrictive provisions of section 40A(9) which
disallows any contribution made to any welfare funds except where such
contributions are covered by section 36(1)(iv)/(iva)/(v) or as required by or
under any other law for the time being in force. Further, the employer can
contribute to recognized provident fund account of the employee upto 12%
of salary, and the same would not be taxable in the hands of the employees.
The amount or aggregate of amounts of any contribution made in a
recognised provident fund, in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1) and in an
approved superannuation fund by the employer to the account of the
assessee, to the extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000, would be taxable as perquisite
in the hands of the employee. Likewise, if an employee's contribution to RPF
exceeds ` 2,50,000 p.a. or ` 5,00,000 p.a. (on or after 1.4.2021), as the case
may be, depending on whether the employer contributes to RPF, then,
interest accured on the amount exceeding the specified threshold would be
taxable. The detailed provisions have been dealt with in Unit 1 of Chapter 3.

(3) Insurance policies: Any payment made by an employer on behalf of an
       employee to maintain a life policy will be treated as perquisite in the hands

       of the employee. Further, payments received from the employer in respect

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.22  INCOME TAX LAW

       of key man insurance policies constitute income in the hands of the
       employees. However, any sum reimbursed by the employer in respect of any
       mediclaim premium paid by the employee to keep in force an insurance on
       his health or the health of any member of his family under any scheme
       approved by the Central Government or IRDA for the purpose of section
       80D is not a perquisite in the hands of the employee.

       Further, the payment of premium by the employer on behalf of the
       employee will not be treated as a perquisite in the case of accident
       insurance policies. This is due to the fact that the employer has a vested
       interest in the safety of the life of his employee who is engaged in such
       dangerous occupations.2

       In respect of accident insurance policies, the term perquisite applies to only
       such sums in regard to which there was an obligation on the part of the
       employer to pay and a vested right on the part of the employee. If the
       employee has no vested interest in the policy, it cannot be considered as a
       perquisite. In cases where an employer takes out accident insurance policy
       covering all workmen and staff members and pays insurance premium and
       whenever any worker/staff member meets with an accident and the amount
       of claim is received from the insurance company and the same is paid away
       by the employer to the said worker or his family members, the premium
       paid by the employer in respect of group accident policies could not be
       considered as a perquisite, under section 17 to be added in the salary
       income of any employee3. The amount received from insurance company on
       accident or death by employee or his dependents will not also be in the
       nature of income but a capital receipt and therefore the same will not be
       taxable.

(4) Dearness allowance, dearness pay: The employer should ensure that
       dearness allowance and dearness pay should form part of "salary". This is
       because certain items like employer's contribution to the recognised
       provident fund, commuted pension etc. are calculated on the basis of salary.
       Therefore, if dearness allowance, dearness pay etc. are included in salary,
       the above benefits will also increase leading to higher terminal benefits in
       the hands of the employee.

2CIT v Lala Shri Dhar (1972) 84 ITR 192 (Del) and CIT v Vinay Bharat Ram (1981) 129 ITR 128 (Del)
3CIT v. Lala Shri Dhar (1972) 84 ITR 192 (Delhi)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.23  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Also, for determining the exemption in respect of employer's contribution
to provident fund, house rent allowance etc., dearness allowance forming
part of pay for retirement benefits is included within the meaning of
"Salary".

(5) Leave travel facility: If the employee exercises the option to shift out of
       the default tax regime, the employer should avail leave travel facility. Under
       section 10(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, exemption is provided in the
       hands of the employee in respect of leave travel concession. Such
       exemption is available for the employee, spouse, children (upto a maximum
       of 2 children), dependent parents, dependent brothers and dependent
       sisters.

However, if the employee pays tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC, exemption under section 10(5) would not be available.

(6) Rent free accommodation / House Rent Allowance (HRA): An employee
       should analyse the tax incidence of a perquisite and an allowance, whenever
       he is given an option, in order to choose the one which is more beneficial to
       him. In the case of Rent Free Accommodation vs. HRA, it must be noted that
       the perquisite of rent free accommodation is taxed as per Rule 3(1) of the
       Income-tax Rules, 1962 and HRA is exempt to the extent mentioned in
       section 10(13A) read with Rule 2A. However, exemption for HRA would be
       available only if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default
       tax regime. The employee should therefore work out his tax liability and net
       cash flow under both the options and then, decide on whether to receive
       HRA or choose a rent free accommodation.

(7) Uncommuted/Commuted pension: Uncommuted pension is fully taxable.
       Therefore, the employees should get their pension commuted. Commuted
       pension is fully exempt from tax in the case of government employees and
       partly exempt from tax in the case of non-government employees.

(8) Provident Fund: Accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an
       employee participating in a Recognized Provident Fund (RPF) would be
       exempt, where an employee who is a member of a recognised provident
       fund and who resigns after completing five years of continuous service.
       However, if he resigns before completing five years of continuous service he
       should ensure that he joins an organisation which maintains a recognised

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.24  INCOME TAX LAW

       provident fund. The accumulated balance of the provident fund with the
       previous employer will be exempt from tax provided the same is transferred
       to the new employer who also maintains a recognised provident fund.

       It may be noted the exemption would not be available in respect of income
       by way of interest accrued during the previous year to the extent it relates
       to the amount or the aggregate of amounts of contribution made by the
       employee exceeding ` 2,50,000/` 5,00,000, as the case may be, in any
       previous year in that fund, on or after 1st April, 2021 and computed in
       prescribed manner.

(9) Other retirement benefits: Incidence of tax on retirement benefits like
       leave encashment, commuted pension, accumulated balance of
       unrecognized provident fund is lower if they are paid in the beginning of
       the financial year.

       The employer and the employees may mutually plan in such a way that
       retirement takes place in the beginning of a financial year.

(10) Tax free perquisites: The following are the perquisites which are exempt
       from tax­

       (i) Use of computers and laptop by employee;

       (ii) Medical facility in employer's own hospital or a public hospital or
               Government or other approved hospital;

       (iii) Educational benefit in a school run by employer provided value of
               benefit does not exceed ` 1,000 per month per child.

(11) Considerations for salary structuring: The perquisite valuation rules
       prescribe the method for valuing the various perquisites provided by the
       employer to his employees on the basis of the cost of such perquisites to
       the employee. For a detailed study, students are advised to refer to the Unit
       1 of Chapter 3 - `Salaries'. Accordingly, the entire salary structuring for
       employees will have to be done after carefully weighing the pros and cons
       of paying salary in monetary terms or allowing the benefit of perquisites in
       kind to the employees.

       It may be noted that a salaried person has an option to choose whether to pay
       tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or shift out of the
       default tax regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act in each
       previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.25  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Under section 115BAC, in respect of his total income, he can not avail
certain exemptions/deductions like Leave Travel Concession, HRA,
exemption under section 10(14) (other than those allowable under this
section), interest on housing loan on self-occupied property, deductions
under Chapter VI-A [other than under section 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and
section 80JJAA] etc. The exemptions allowable under section 10(14) under
the default tax regime under section 115BAC include travelling allowance,
daily allowance, conveyance allowance and transport allowance to
blind/deaf and dumb/orthopedically handicapped employee.

Therefore, a salaried taxpayer not availing the above deductions/
exemptions or availing a lesser amount of such deductions/ exemptions can
analyse his tax liability under default tax regime under section 115BAC vis-
à-vis the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in each year. An
employee intending to shift out of the default tax regime under section
115BAC has to intimate the same to the employer.

ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. A, aged 32 years, is employed with XYZ (P) Ltd. on a basic salary of ` 80,000
p.m. He has received transport allowance of ` 15,000 p.m. and house rent
allowance of ` 20,000 p.m. from the company for the P.Y. 2025-26. He has paid
rent of ` 25,000 p.m. for an accommodation in Delhi. Mr. A has paid interest of
` 2,10,000 for housing loan taken for the construction of his house in Mumbai. The
construction of the house is completed in March, 2026 and his parents live in that
house.

Other Information

- Contribution to PPF - ` 1,50,000

- Contribution to pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD - ` 50,000

- Payment of medical insurance premium for father, who is of the age of 65 -
       ` 55,000

- Payment of medical insurance premium for self and spouse - ` 32,000

Compute the total income and tax liability of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2026-27 in the most
beneficial manner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a            9.26             INCOME TAX LAW

SOLUTION

Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. A for A.Y. 2026-27
                 under default tax regime under section 115BAC

                     Particulars                            `

Salaries                                                    9,60,000
Basic Salary [` 80,000 x 12]

Transport allowance [` 15,000 x 12]                         1,80,000

HRA received [` 20,000 x 12]                                2,40,000

Gross salary                                                13,80,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)                            (75,000)

Income from house property                                  13,05,000
Interest on housing loan                                                 -

Gross Total Income                                          13,05,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI- A

Section 80C

Contribution in PPF                                            -

Section 80CCD

Contribution to pension scheme                                 -

Section 80D

Mediclaim insurance premium for self and parents               -

Total Income                                                13,05,000

Tax liability                                       20,000
Tax @5% on ` 4,00,000 [` 8,00,000 - ` 4,00,000]

Tax @10% on ` 4,00,000 [` 12,00,000 - ` 8,00,000]   40,000  75,750
Tax @15% on ` 1,05,000 [` 13,05,000 - ` 12,00,000]  15,750

Add: Health & Education cess @ 4%                           3,030

Total Tax Liability                                         78,780

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                9.27           a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. A for A.Y. 2026-27
                          under normal provisions of the Act

                                      Particulars                    `
Salaries                                                           9,60,000
Basic Salary [` 80,000 x 12]

Transport allowance [` 15,000 x 12]                                1,80,000

HRA received                                        2,40,000

Less: Least of the following exempt u/s 10(13A)     2,04,000          36,000

HRA Received                                        2,40,000

Actual rent paid ­ 10% of salary [` 3,00,000 ­ ` 96,000] 2,04,000

50% of salary (Since he is staying in Delhi being a 4,80,000
metro city)

Gross salary                                                       11,76,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)                                   (50,000)

                                                                   11,26,000

Income from house property                                         (2,00,000)
[Annual Value is Nil. Deduction u/s 24(b) for interest on housing
loan would be restricted to ` 2,00,000, in case of self-occupied
property, which would represent loss from house property]

Gross Total Income                                                 9,26,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A

Section 80C                                                        1,50,000
Contribution to PPF

Section 80CCD(1B)                                                     50,000
Own contribution to pension scheme

Section 80D
Mediclaim insurance premium

For self and spouse, restricted to                  25,000

For father, who is a senior citizen, restricted to  50,000

                                                                      75,000

Total Income                                                       6,51,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.28  INCOME TAX LAW

Tax liability                                        12,500              42,700
Tax @ 5% on ` 2,50,000 [` 5,00,000 - ` 2,50,000]     30,200                1,708
Tax @ 20% on ` 1,51,000 [` 6,51,000 - ` 5,00,000]
Add: Health & Education cess @ 4%                                        44,408
                                                                         44,410
Total Tax Liability
Total Tax Liability (Rounded Off)

Since tax liability as per the normal provisions of the Act is lower than the tax
liability under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, it would be beneficial
for Mr. A to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for
A.Y. 2026-27.

Note: In this case, Mr. A is entitled to exemption u/s 10(13A), benefit of interest
on housing loan in respect of self-occupied property and Chapter VI-A
deductions, owing to which his total income is reduced by ` 6,54,000. Hence, in
this case, it is beneficial for Mr. A to shift out of the default tax regime under
section 115BAC for A.Y. 2026-27.

ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. Kadam is entitled to a salary of ` 41,000 per month. He is given an option by
his employer either to take house rent allowance or a rent free accommodation
which is owned by the company. The HRA amount payable was ` 7,000 per month.
The rent for the hired accommodation was ` 6,000 per month at New Delhi. Advice
Mr. Kadam whether it would be beneficial for him to avail HRA or Rent Free
Accommodation. Give your advice on the basis of "Net Take Home Cash benefits".
Assume Mr. Kadam exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime under
section 115BAC.

SOLUTION
           Computation of tax liability of Kadam under both the options

                             Particulars             Option I ­  Option II ­
Basic Salary (` 41,000 x 12 Months)                     HRA          RFA
                                                          (`)
                                                                      (`)

                                                     4,92,000 4,92,000

Perquisite value of rent-free accommodation (10% of  N.A.                49,200
` 4,92,000)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                                       9.29     a
                                      AND OPTIMISATION

House rent Allowance (` 7,000 x 12 Months) ` 84,000

Less: Exempt u/s 10(13A) ­ least of the following -

- 50% of Basic Salary                              ` 2,46,000

- Actual HRA received                              ` 84,000

- Rent paid less 10% of salary ` 22,800 ` 22,800               61,200

Gross Salary                                                   5,53,200 5,41,200

Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)                            50,000                          50,000

Net Salary                                                     5,03,200 4,91,200

Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A                                                       -     -

Total Income                                                   5,03,200                     4,91,200
Tax on total income                                               13,140                       12,060

Less: Rebate under section 87A - Lower of ` 12,500 or                              Nil         12,060
income-tax of ` 12,060, since total income does not
exceed ` 5,00,000

                                                               13,140                          Nil

Add: Health and Education cess@4%                                                  526         Nil

Tax liability                                                  13,666                          Nil
Tax liability (Rounded off)
                                                               13,670                          Nil

                                 Cash Flow Statement

                    Particulars                                Option I ­ HRA      Option II ­ RFA
Inflow: Salary                                                           5,76,000             4,92,000
Less: Outflow: Rent paid                                                 (72,000)                       -
Tax on total income                                                      (13,670)                     Nil

Net Inflow                                                     4,90,330                     4,92,000

Since the net cash inflow under option II (RFA) is higher than in Option I (HRA), it
is beneficial for Mr. Kadam to avail Option II, i.e., Rent Free Accommodation.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.30               INCOME TAX LAW

         TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Compute the tax liability of Mr. Gupta (aged 61) under default tax regime,
       having total income of ` 1,01,50,000 for the A.Y.2026-27. Assume that his
       total income comprises of salary income, income from house property and
       interest on fixed deposit.

2. Miss Charlie, an American national, got married to Mr. Radhey of India in
       USA on 02.03.2025 and came to India for the first time on 16.03.2025. She left
       for USA on 19.9.2025. She returned to India again on 27.03.2026. While in
       India, she had purchased a show room in Mumbai on 30.04.2025, which was
       leased out to a company on a rent of ` 25,000 p.m. from 01.05.2025. She had
       taken loan from a bank for purchase of this show room on which bank had
       charged interest of ` 97,500 upto 31.03.2026. She had received the following
       cash gifts from her relatives and friends during 1.4.2025 to 31.3.2026:

- From parents of husband ` 51,000

- From married sister of husband ` 11,000

- From two very close friends of her husband (` 1,51,000 and ` 21,000)

(a) Determine her residential status and compute the total income
       chargeable to tax along with the amount of tax liability on such income
       for the A.Y. 2026-27 if she opts out of the default tax regime under
       section 115BAC.

(b) Would her residential status undergo any change, assuming that she is
       a person of Indian origin and her total income from Indian sources is
       ` 18,00,000 and she is not liable to tax in USA?

3. Dr. Niranjana, a resident individual, aged 60 years is running a clinic in Surat.
       Her Income and Expenditure Account for the year ending March 31st, 2026 is
       as under:

        Expenditure                                `   Income      `
To Medicine consumed
                                                   1B                                                           2B

                      35,38,400 By Consultation and            58,85,850
                                          medical charges

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.31                                  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

To Staff salary           13,80,000 By Income-tax refund                                    5,450
                                             (principal ` 5,000,
                                             interest ` 450)

To Clinic consumables     1,10,000 By Dividend from units                                   10,500
                                             of UTI (Gross)

To Rent paid                                       90,000 By Winning from game
                                                                   show on T.V. (net of
                                                                  TDS of ` 15,000)          35,000

To Administrative         2,55,000 By Rent                                                  27,000
     expenses

To Amount paid to         1,50,000
     scientific research
     association
     approved u/s 35

To Net profit             4,40,400

                          59,63,800                                                      59,63,800

(i) Rent paid includes ` 30,000 paid by cheque towards rent for her
       residential house in Surat.

(ii) Clinic equipments are:

       1.4.2025 Opening W.D.V. - ` 5,00,000

       7.12.2025 Acquired (cost) by cheque - ` 2,00,000

(iii) Rent received relates to residential house property situated at Surat.
       Gross Annual Value ` 27,000. The municipal tax of ` 2,000, paid in
       December, 2025, has been included in "administrative expenses".

(iv) She received salary of ` 7,500 p.m. from "Full Cure Hospital" which has
       not been included in the "consultation and medical charges".

(v) Dr. Niranjana availed a loan of ` 5,50,000 from a bank for higher
       education of her daughter. She repaid principal of ` 1,00,000, and
       interest thereon ` 55,000 during the previous year 2025-26.

(vi) She paid ` 1,00,000 as tuition fee (not in the nature of development
       fees/ donation) to the university for full time education of her daughter.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a         9.32         INCOME TAX LAW

(vii) An amount of ` 28,000 has also been paid by cheque on 27th March,
       2026 for her medical insurance premium.

From the above, compute the total income of Dr. Niranjana for the
A.Y. 2026-27 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the
normal provisions of the Act.

4. Ms. Purvi, aged 55 years, is a Chartered Accountant in practice. She maintains
       her accounts on cash basis. Her Income and Expenditure account for the year
       ended March 31, 2026 reads as follows:

    Expenditure        (`)                             Income         (`)           (`)
Salary to staff
Stipend to articled    15,50,000 Fees earned:                                    55,98,300
Assistants                                                                           10,524
                       1,37,000 Audit                                 27,88,000       7,600
Incentive to articled                                                                15,800
Assistants                                         Taxation           15,40,300
                                                   services                          85,600

                       13,000 Consultancy                             12,70,000

                                                   Dividend on

                                                   shares of X Ltd.,

                                                   an        Indian

                                                   company (Gross)

Office rent            12,24,000 Income from UTI
                                       (Gross)

Printing        and    12,22,000                   Honorarium
                                                   received from
stationery                                         various
                                                   institutions for
                                                   valuation of
                                                   answer papers

Meeting, seminar       31,600 Rent received
and conference                     from residential
                                   flat let out
Purchase of car (for
official use)          80,000
Repair,
maintenance            4,000
and petrol of car

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.33  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Travelling expenses 5,25,000

Municipal tax paid   3,000
in respect of house
property

Net Profit           9,28,224

                     57,17,824                           57,17,824

       Other Information:

       (i) Allowable rate of depreciation on motor car is 15%.

       (ii) Value of benefits received from clients during the course of profession is
              ` 10,500.

       (iii) Incentives to articled assistants represent amount paid to two articled
               assistants for passing CA Intermediate Examination at first attempt.

       (iv) Repairs and maintenance of car include ` 2,000 for the period from
               1-10-2025 to 30-09-2026.

       (v) Salary includes ` 30,000 to a computer specialist in cash for assisting
               Ms. Purvi in one professional assignment.

       (vi) The travelling expenses include expenditure incurred on foreign tour of
              ` 32,000 which was within the RBI norms.

       (vii) Medical Insurance Premium on the health of dependent brother and
              major son dependent on her amounts to ` 5,000 and ` 10,000,
               respectively, paid in cash.

       (viii) She invested an amount of ` 10,000 in National Saving Certificate.

       Compute the total income and tax liability of Ms. Purvi for the A.Y. 2026-27 in a
       most beneficial manner.

5. Mr. Y carries on his own business. An analysis of his trading and profit & loss
       for the year ended 31-3-2026 revealed the following information:

       (1) The net profit was ` 11,20,000.

       (2) The following incomes were credited in the profit and loss account:

              (a) Income from UTI ` 22,000 (Gross)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.34  INCOME TAX LAW

   (b) Interest on debentures ` 17,500 (Gross)

   (c) Winnings from horse races ` 15,000 (Gross)

(3) It was found that some stocks were omitted to be included in both the
       opening and closing stocks, the value of which were:

   Opening stock ` 8,000.

   Closing stock ` 12,000.

(4) ` 1,00,000 was debited in the profit and loss account, being contribution
       to a University approved and notified under section 35(1)(ii).

(5) Salary includes ` 20,000 paid to his brother which is unreasonable to
       the extent of ` 2,500.

(6) Advertisement expenses include 15 gift packets of dry fruits costing
       ` 1,000 per packet presented to important customers.

(7) Total expenses on car was ` 78,000. The car was used both for business
       and personal purposes. ¾th is for business purposes.

(8) Miscellaneous expenses included ` 30,000 paid to A & Co., a goods
       transport operator in cash on 31-1-2026 for distribution of the
       company's product to the warehouses.

(9) Depreciation debited in the books was ` 55,000. Depreciation allowed
       as per Income-tax Rules, 1962 was ` 50,000.

(10) Drawings of ` 10,000 debited in the books.

(11) Investment in NSC ` 15,000 debited in the books.

Compute the total income of Mr. Y for the assessment year 2026-27 under
optional tax regime as per normal provisions of the Act.

6. Balamurugan furnishes the following information for the year ended
       31-03-2026:

                                  Particulars              `
Income from textile business                           (1,35,000)
Income from house property
Lottery winning (Gross)                                  (15,000)
Speculation business income                             5,00,000
                                                        1,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
 INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                                    9.35     a
                               AND OPTIMISATION
                                                                                  3,70,000
Income by way of salary (Computed)                                                  70,000

Long term capital gain u/s 112

Compute his total income, tax liability and advance tax obligations under
default tax regime under section 115BAC.

7. Mr. Rajiv aged 50 years, a resident individual and practicing Chartered
       Accountant, furnishes you the receipts and payments account for the financial
       year 2025-26.

                  Receipts and Payments Account

      Receipts      `                                       Payments                  `
                                                                                  21,50,000
Opening           balance 12,000 Staff salary, bonus and
                                                                                  11,48,000
(1.4.2025) Cash on                                 stipend to articled clerks         30,000
hand and at Bank
                                                                                   1,88,000
Fee from professional 59,38,000 Other                        administrative
                                                                                      24,000
services (Gross)                                   expenses                        4,25,000

Rent                50,000 Office rent                                                18,000

Motor car loan from 2,50,000 Housing loan repaid to SBI                               20,000

Canara Bank (@ 9%                                  (includes interest of              30,000
p.a.)                                              ` 88,000)
                                                                                   2,72,000
                                                   Life insurance premium             20,000

                                                   (10% of sum assured)

                                                   Motor car (acquired in Jan.
                                                   2026 by A/c payee cheque)

                                                   Medical   insurance

                                                   premium (for self and wife)

                                                   (paid by A/c Payee
                                                   cheque)

                                                   Books bought on 1.07.2025

                                                   (annual publications by
                                                   A/c payee cheque)

                                                   Computer acquired on

                                                   1.11.2025 by A/c payee
                                                   cheque (for professional use)

                                                   Domestic drawings

                                                   Public provident fund
                                                   subscription

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.36       INCOME TAX LAW

                                                   Motor car maintenance          10,000
                                                                              19,15,000
                                                   Closing      balance
                                                                             62,50,000
                                                   (31.3.2026) Cash on hand

                                                   and at Bank

              62,50,000

Following further information is given to you:

(1) He occupies 50% of the building for own residence and let out the
       balance for residential use at a monthly rent of ` 5,000. The building
       was constructed during the year 2010-11, when the housing loan was
       taken.

(2) Motor car was put to use both for official and personal purpose. One-
       fifth of the motor car use is for personal purpose. No car loan interest
       was paid during the year.

(3) The written down value of assets as on 1-4-2025 are given below:

   Furniture & Fittings                                                   ` 60,000
   Plant & Machinery                                                      ` 80,000

   (Air-conditioners, Photocopiers, etc.)

   Computers                                                              ` 50,000

Note: Mr. Rajiv follows regularly the cash system of accounting.

Compute the total income of Mr. Rajiv for the A.Y. 2026-27 assuming that he
has shifted out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

8. From the following details, compute the total income and tax liability of
       Mr. Siddhant, aged 31 years, of Delhi both as per section 115BAC and as per
       the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the A.Y.2026-27. Advise
       Mr. Siddhant in which regime he should pay tax for A.Y. 2026-27:

                                 Particulars                                    `
Salary including dearness allowance                                          4,35,000
Bonus
Salary of servant provided by the employer                                     15,000
Rent paid by Siddhant for his accommodation                                    12,000
Bills paid by the employer for gas, electricity and water                      49,600
provided free of cost at the above flat                                        11,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                   9.37       a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Siddhant purchased a flat in a co-operative housing society in Delhi for
` 4,75,000 in April, 2016, which was financed by a loan from Life Insurance
Corporation of India of ` 1,60,000@15% interest, his own savings of ` 65,000
and a deposit from a nationalized bank for ` 2,50,000 to whom this flat was
given on lease for ten years. The rent payable by the bank was ` 3,500 per
month. The following particulars are relevant:

(a) Municipal taxes paid by Mr. Siddhant              ` 4,300 (per annum)

(b) House Insurance                                   ` 860

(c) He earned ` 2,700 in share speculation business and lost ` 4,200 in
       cotton speculation business.

(d) In the year 2021-22, he had gifted ` 30,000 to his wife and ` 20,000 to
       his son who was aged 11. The gifted amounts were advanced to
       Mr. Rajesh, who was paying interest@19% per annum.

(e) Siddhant received a gift of ` 30,000 each from four friends.

(f) He contributed ` 50,000 to Public Provident Fund.

9. Ramdin, aged 33 years, working as Manager (Sales) with Frozen Foods Ltd.,
       provides the following information for the year ended 31.03.2026:

- Basic Salary                                               ` 15,000 p.m.

- DA (50% of it is meant for retirement benefits)            ` 12,000 p.m.

                                                             0B

- Commission as a percentage of turnover of the Company              0.5 %

- Turnover of the Company                                    ` 50 lakhs

- Bonus                                                           ` 50,000

- Gratuity                                                        ` 30,000

- Own Contribution to R.P.F.                                      ` 30,000

- Employer's contribution to R.P.F.                   20% of basic salary

- Interest credited in the R.P.F. account @ 15% p.a.              ` 15,000

- Gold Ring worth ` 10,000 was given by employer on his 25th wedding
       anniversary.

- Music System purchased on 01.04.2025 by the company for ` 85,000
       and was given to him for personal use.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.38  INCOME TAX LAW

       - Two old light goods vehicles owned by him were leased to a transport
              company against the fixed charges of ` 6,500 p.m. Books of account are
               not maintained.

       - Received interest of ` 5,860 on bank FDRs on 24.4.2025 and interest of
              ` 7,540 from the debentures of Indian Companies on 5.5.2025.

       - Made payment by cheques of ` 15,370 towards premium on Life
              Insurance policies and ` 22,500 for Mediclaim Insurance policy for self
               and spouse.

       - Invested in NSC ` 30,000 and in FDR of SBI for 5 years ` 50,000.

       - Donations of ` 11,000 to an institution approved u/s 80G and of
              ` 5,100 to Prime Minister's National Relief Fund were given during the
               year by way of cheque.

       Compute his total income and tax liability thereon for the A.Y. 2026-27.
       Assume that Mr. Ramdin has exercised the option to shift out of the default
       tax regime under section 115BAC.

10. From the following particulars furnished by Mr. X for the year ended
       31.3.2026, you are requested to compute his total income and tax payable for
       the assessment year 2026-27, assuming that he opts out of the default tax
       regime under section 115BAC.

       (a) Mr. X retired on 31.12.2025 at the age of 58, after putting in 26 years
               and 1 month of service, from a private company at Mumbai.

       (b) He was paid a salary of ` 25,000 p.m. and house rent allowance of
              ` 6,000 p.m. He paid rent of ` 6,500 p.m. during his tenure of service.

       (c) On retirement, he was paid a gratuity of ` 3,50,000. He was covered by
               the payment of Gratuity Act. Mr. X had not received any other gratuity
               at any point of time earlier, other than this gratuity.

       (d) He had accumulated leave of 15 days per annum during the period of
               his service; this was encashed by Mr. X at the time of his retirement. A
              sum of ` 3,15,000 was received by him in this regard. His average salary
              for last 10 months may be taken as ` 24,500. Employer allowed 30 days
               leave per annum.

       (e) After retirement, he ventured into textile business and incurred a loss of
              ` 80,000 for the period upto 31.3.2026.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                   9.39    a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

(f) Mr. X has deposited ` 1,00,000 in public provident fund.

11. Rosy and Mary are sisters, born and brought up at Mumbai. Rosy got married
        in 1982 and settled at Canada since 1982. Mary got married and settled in
        Mumbai. Both of them are below 60 years. The following are the details of
        their income for the previous year ended 31.3.2026:

S.                   Particulars                       Rosy       Mary
                                                         `          `
No.

1. Pension received from State Government                     -- 60,000

2. Pension received from Canadian Government           20,000     --

3. Long-term capital gain on sale of land on 1,00,000 1,00,000
      15.5.2025 at Mumbai taxable

4. Short-term capital gain on sale of shares on        20,000 2,50,000
      23.4.2025 of Indian listed companies in respect
      of which STT was paid

5. LIC premium paid                                           -- 10,000

6. Premium paid to Canadian Life Insurance 40,000                 --

     Corporation at Canada

7. Mediclaim policy premium paid by A/c Payee                 -- 25,000
      Cheque

8. Deposit in PPF                                             -- 20,000

9. Rent received in respect of house property at       60,000     30,000
      Mumbai

       Compute the total income and tax liability of Mrs. Rosy and Mrs. Mary for the
       A.Y. 2026-27 and tax thereon assuming both exercised the option to shift out
       of the default tax regime.

12. Mr. Rishabh, a resident individual, aged 54 years, is engaged in the business
       of manufacturing clothes. He earned profit of ` 82,45,000 as per profit and
       loss account after debiting and crediting the following items:

       (i) Depreciation ` 15,40,000

       (ii) Short term capital gains on transfer of listed equity shares in a company
              on which STT is paid ` 10,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.40  INCOME TAX LAW

       (iii) He received income-tax refund of ` 15,550 which includes interest on
              refund of ` 4,550.

       (iv) Dividend income from Indian companies ` 15,00,000

       Additional information ­

       (i) Mr. Rishabh installed new plant and machinery for ` 65 lakhs on
               1.10.2025 which was put to use on 1.1.2026. Depreciation (including
              additional depreciation) on this amount of ` 65 lakhs is included in the
               depreciation debited to profit and loss account which has been
               computed as per Income-tax Rules, 1962.

       (ii) Mr. Rishabh took a loan from SBI of ` 50 lakhs on 15.9.2025 @10.5%
               p.a. to purchase such plant and machinery. Total interest upto
               31.3.2026 has been paid on 31.3.2026 and the same has been debited
               to profit and loss account.

       (iii) Advance tax paid during the year is ` 17,50,000

       (iv) Rishabh purchased goods for ` 40 lakhs from Mr. Ram, his brother. The
              market value of the goods is ` 35 lakhs.

       (v) He paid ` 40,000 as life insurance premium taken on the life of his
               married daughter who is not dependent on him. The sum assured is
              ` 5,00,000 and the policy was taken on 1.4.2020.

       (vi) He paid ` 45,000 by cheque towards health insurance policy covering
               himself, his spouse and his children.

       (vii) On 1.7.2025, Mr. Rishabh withdrew ` 1.5 crores in cash from three
               current accounts maintained by him with HSBC. There are no other
               withdrawals during the year. He regularly files his return of income.

       You are required to compute the total income and tax payable after adjusting
       TDS/TCS/advance tax, if any, by Mr. Rishabh for the A.Y. 2026-27, in the
       manner so that he can make maximum tax savings.

13. Mr. Sunil, aged 48 years, a resident Indian has furnished the following
       particulars for the year ended 31.03.2026:

       (i) He occupies ground floor of his residential building and has let out first
              floor for residential use at an annual rent of ` 2,95,000. He has paid

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.41  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

municipal taxes of ` 25,000 for the current financial year. Both these
floors are of equal size.

(ii) As per interest certificate from HDFC bank, he paid ` 1,50,000 as
       interest and ` 80,000 towards principal repayment of housing loan
       borrowed for the above residential building in the year 2020.

(iii) He owns an industrial undertaking established in a SEZ and which had
       commenced operation during the financial year 2019-20. Total turnover
       of the undertaking was ` 400 lakhs, which includes ` 150 lakhs from
       export turnover. Out of ` 150 lakhs, only ` 120 lakhs have been received
       in India in convertible foreign exchange on or before 30.9.2026. This
       industrial undertaking fulfills all the conditions of section 10AA of the
       Income-tax Act, 1961. Profit from this industry is ` 40 lakhs.

(iv) He employed 20 new employees for the said industrial undertaking
       during the previous year 2025-26. Out of 20 employees, 12 were
       employed on 1st May 2025 for monthly emoluments of ` 18,000 and
       remaining were employed on 1st September 2025 on monthly
       emoluments of ` 12,000. All these employees participate in recognised
       provident fund and they are paid their emoluments directly to their bank
       accounts.

(v) He earned ` 30,000 and ` 40,000 as interest on saving bank deposits
       and fixed deposits, respectively.

(vi) He also sold his vacant land on 01.12.2025 for ` 16 lakhs. The stamp
       duty value of land at the time of transfer was ` 17 lakhs. This land was
       acquired by him on 15.10.1998 for ` 2.80 lakhs. The FMV of the land as
       on 1st April, 2001 was ` 4.8 lakhs and Stamp duty value on the said date
       was ` 4 lakhs. He had incurred registration expenses of ` 12,000 at that
       time.

CII ­ F.Y. 2001-02: 100; F.Y. 2025-26: 376.

(vii) He paid insurance premium of ` 40,000 towards life insurance policy of
       his son, who is not dependent on him.

You are requested to compute total income and tax liability of Mr. Sunil for the
Assessment Year 2026-27 under default tax regime.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    a  9.42  INCOME TAX LAW

14. Mr. X, an individual set up a unit in Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in the
       financial year 2019-20 for production of washing machines. The unit fulfills
       all the conditions of section 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961. During the
       financial year 2024-25, he has also set up a warehousing facility in a district
       of Tamil Nadu for storage of agricultural produce. It fulfills all the conditions
       of section 35AD. Capital expenditure in respect of warehouse amounted to
       ` 75 lakhs (including cost of land ` 10 lakhs). The warehouse became
       operational with effect from 1st April, 2025 and the expenditure of ` 75 lakhs
       was capitalized in the books on that date.

    Relevant details for the F.Y. 2025-26 are as follows:

                                    Particulars                     `
    Profit of unit located in SEZ                               40,00,000
    Export turnover received in India in convertible foreign    80,00,000
    exchange on or before 30.9.2026
    Domestic sales of above unit                                20,00,000
    Profit from operation of warehousing facility (before     1,05,00,000
    considering deduction under Section 35AD)

    Compute income-tax (including AMT under Section 115JC) liability of Mr. X
    for A.Y. 2026-27 both as per section 115BAC and as per regular provisions of
    the Income-tax Act, 1961 for A.Y. 2026-27. Advise Mr. X whether he should
    pay tax under default tax regime or normal provisions of the Act.

             ANSWERS

1.     Computation of tax liability of Mr. Gupta for the A.Y.2026-27

             under default tax regime

    (A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
           ` 1,01,50,000

       ` 4,00,000 ­ ` 8,00,000 @5%                 ` 20,000

       ` 8,00,001 ­ ` 12,00,000 @10%               ` 40,000

       ` 12,00,001 ­ ` 16,00,000 @15% ` 60,000

       ` 16,00,001 ­ ` 20,00,000 @20% ` 80,000

       ` 20,00,001 ­ ` 24,00,000 @25% ` 1,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                            9.43  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

     ` 24,00,001 ­ ` 1,01,50,000 @30% ` 23,25,000

Total                                              ` 26,25,000

Add: Surcharge @15%                                ` 3,93,750         ` 30,18,750

(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1crore

(` 3,00,000 plus ` 22,80,000)                                         ` 25,80,000

Add: Surcharge@10%                                                    ` 2,58,000

                                                                      ` 28,38,000

(C) Total Income Less ` 1crore                                        ` 1,50,000

(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore

plus the excess of total income over ` 1 crore (B +C) ` 29,88,000

(E) Tax liability: lower of (A) and (D)                               ` 29,88,000

Add: Health and education cess @4%                                    ` 1,19,520

Tax liability (including cess)                                        ` 31,07,520

(F) Marginal Relief (A ­ D)                                           ` 30,750

Alternative method -

(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
       ` 1,01,50,000

` 4,00,000 ­ ` 8,00,000 @5%                        ` 20,000

` 8,00,001 ­ ` 12,00,000 @10%                      ` 40,000

` 12,00,001 ­ ` 16,00,000 @15% ` 60,000

` 16,00,001 ­ ` 20,00,000 @20% ` 80,000

` 20,00,001 ­ ` 24,00,000 @25% ` 1,00,000

` 24,00,001 ­ ` 1,01,50,000 @30% ` 23,25,000

                                                   ` 26,25,000

Add: Surcharge @15%                                ` 3,93,750         ` 30,18,750

(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore

[(` 3,00,000 plus ` 22,80,000) plus surcharge@10%] ` 28,38,000

(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B)                                        ` 1,80,750

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.44                    INCOME TAX LAW

(D) Marginal Relief (` 1,80,750 ­ ` 1,50,000, being the amount

   of income in excess of ` 1,00,00,000)                        ` 30,750

(E) Tax liability (A)-(D)                                       ` 29,88,000

   Add: Health and education cess @4%                           ` 1,19,520

   Tax liability (including cess)                               ` 31,07,520

2. (a) Under section 6(1), an individual is said to be resident in India in any
               previous year, if he/she satisfies any one of the following conditions:

   (i) He/she has been in India during the previous year for a total period
          of 182 days or more, or

   (ii) He/she has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding
          the previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has
          been in India for at least 60 days in the previous year.

   If an individual satisfies any one of the conditions mentioned above,
   he/she is a resident. If both the above conditions are not satisfied, the
   individual is a non-resident.

   Therefore, the residential status of Miss Charlie, an American National,
   for A.Y.2026-27 has to be determined on the basis of her stay in India
   during the P.Y.2025-26 and in the preceding four previous years.

   Her stay in India during the P.Y.2025-26 and in the preceding four
   years are as under:

   P.Y. 2025-26

   01.04.2025 to 19.09.2025                        -  172 days

   27.03.2026 to 31.03.2026                        -  5 days

   Total                                              177 days

   Four preceding previous years

   P.Y. 2024-25 [1.4.2024 to 31.3.2025] -             16 days

   P.Y. 2023-24 [1.4.2023 to 31.3.2024] -             Nil

   P.Y. 2022-23 [1.4.2022 to 31.3.2023] -             Nil

   P.Y. 2021-22 [1.4.2021 to 31.3.2022] -             Nil

   Total                                              16 days

   The total stay of the assessee during the previous year in India was less
   than 182 days and during the four years preceding this year was for 16

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                       9.45        a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

days. Therefore, due to non-fulfillment of any of the two conditions for a
resident, she would be treated as non-resident for the A.Y.2026-27.

Computation of total income of Miss Charlie for the A.Y. 2026-27

              Particulars                                      `            `
                                                           2,75,000       95,000
Income from house property
Show room located in Mumbai remained on                           Nil  1,72,000
rent from 01.05.2025 to 31.03.2026@                        2,75,000    2,67,000
` 25,000/- p.m.                                            1,80,000

Gross Annual Value [` 25,000 x 11] (See Note                      Nil
1 below)
                                                                  Nil
Less: Municipal taxes                                      1,72,000

Net Annual Value (NAV)

Less: Deduction under section 24

30% of NAV                                         82,500

Interest on loan                                   97,500

Income from other sources
Cash gifts received from non-relatives is
chargeable to tax as per section 56(2)(x), if the
aggregate value of such gifts exceeds ` 50,000.

- ` 50,000 received from parents of
     husband would be exempt, since parents
     of husband fall within the definition of
     `relative' and gifts from a relative are not
     chargeable to tax.

- ` 11,000 received from married sister of
     husband is exempt, since sister-in-law falls
     within the definition of relative and gifts
     from a relative are not chargeable to tax.

- Gift received from two friends of husband
     ` 1,51,000 and ` 21,000 aggregating to
     ` 1,72,000 is taxable under section
     56(2)(x) since the aggregate of ` 1,72,000
     exceeds ` 50,000. (See Note 2 below)

Total income

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.46  INCOME TAX LAW

   Computation of tax liability by Miss Charlie for the A.Y. 2026-27
                        under normal provisions of the Act

                                    Particulars    `
    Tax on total income of ` 2,67,000               850
    Add: Health and Education cess@4%                 34
    Total tax liability                             884
    Total tax liability (rounded off)               880
   Notes:

   1. Actual rent received has been taken as the gross annual value in
          the absence of other information (i.e. Municipal value, fair rental
          value and standard rent) in the question.

   2. If the aggregate value of taxable gifts received from non-relatives
          exceed ` 50,000 during the year, the entire amount received (i.e.
          the aggregate value of taxable gifts received) is taxable. Therefore,
          the entire amount of ` 1,72,000 is taxable under section 56(2)(x).

   3. Since Miss Charlie is a non-resident for the A.Y. 2026-27, rebate
          under section 87A would not be available to her, even though her
          total income does not exceed ` 5 lakhs.

(b) Residential status of Miss Charlie in case she is a person of Indian
       origin and her total income from Indian sources is ` 18,00,000.

   If she is a person of Indian origin and her total income from Indian
   sources exceeds ` 15,00,000 (` 18,00,000, in her case), the condition of
   stay in India for a period exceeding 120 days during the previous year
   and 365 days during the four immediately preceding previous years
   would be applicable for being treated as a resident. Since her stay in
   India exceeds 120 days in the P.Y.2025-26 but the period of her stay in
   India during the four immediately preceding previous years is less
   than 365 days (only 16 days), her residential status as per section 6(1)
   would continue to be same i.e., non-resident in India.

   Further, since she is not a citizen of India, the provisions of section
   6(1A) deeming an individual to be a citizen of India would not get
   attracted in her case, even though she is a person of Indian origin and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                   9.47      a
                                  AND OPTIMISATION

    her total income from Indian sources exceeds ` 15,00,000 and she is
    not liable to pay tax in USA.

    Therefore, her residential status would be non-resident in India for the
    previous year 2025-26.

3.  Computation of total income of Dr. Niranjana for A.Y. 2026-27

    under default tax regime

                          18BParticulars           `       `            `
    I Income from Salary
                                                           90,000
         Basic Salary (` 7,500 x 12)

    Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)                    75,000 15,000

    II19B Income from house property                       27,000
         Gross Annual Value (GAV)

    Less: Municipal taxes paid                             2,000

    Net Annual Value (NAV)                                 25,000       17,500
                                                            7,500
    Less: Deduction u/s 24@30% of
    ` 25,000

    III 20B Income from profession                         4,40,400

          Net profit as per Income and
          Expenditure account

    Less: Items of income to be treated
    separately

    (i) Rent received (taxable under               27,000
         the head "Income from house
         property")

    (ii) Dividend from units of UTI                10,500
         (taxable under the head "Income
         from other sources")

    (iii) Winning from game show on                35,000
         T.V. (net of TDS) (taxable under
         the head "Income from other
         sources")

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.48    INCOME TAX LAW

   (iv) Income tax refund                          5,450 77,950

                                                             3,62,450

   Less: Allowable expenditure

   Depreciation on clinic equipments

   on ` 5,00,000@15%                               75,000

   on ` 2,00,000@7.5%                              15,000    90,000

   (On equipments acquired during
   the year in December 2025, she is
   entitled to depreciation @50% of
   normal depreciation, since the
   same are put to use for less than
   180 days during the year)

                                                             2,72,450

   Add: Items of expenditure not
   allowable while computing
   business income

   (i) Amount paid to scientific                   1,50,000
        research association approved
        u/s 35 (not allowed under
        default tax regime)

   (i) Rent for her residential                    30,000
        accommodation included in
        Income and Expenditure A/c

   (ii) Municipal tax paid relating to             2,000 1,82,000 4,54,450
        residential house at Surat
        included in administrative
        expenses

   IV Income from other sources

   (a) Interest on income-tax                                450

   refund

   (b) Dividend from UTI (taxable in                         10,500
           the hands of unit holders)

   (c) Winnings from TV game show                            50,000 60,950
          (` 35,000 + ` 15,000)

   Gross Total Income                                                  5,47,900

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                  9.49    a
                              AND OPTIMISATION
                                                                      Nil
      Less: Deductions under Chapter                                  Nil
              VI-A:                                                   Nil
                                                              5,47,900
      (a) Section 80C [Not allowed under
           default tax regime]

      (b) Section 80D [Not allowed under
           default tax regime]

      (c) Section 80E [Not allowed under
           default tax regime]

      Total income

Computation of total income of Dr. Niranjana for A.Y. 2026-27
                    under normal provisions of the Act

              18BParticulars                          `           `

Gross Total Income as per default tax regime                  5,47,900
                                                                 25,000
Add: Standard deduction of ` 25,000, being the

excess amount allowed u/s 115BAC

Less: Items of expenditure allowable while
computing business income under normal
provisions of the Act

100% deduction is allowable in respect of the                    1,50,000
amount paid to scientific research association
allowable under normal provisions of the Act.

Gross Total Income as per normal provisions                           4,22,900
of the Act                                            1,00,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A:
(a) Section 80C - Tuition fee paid to university for

     full time education of her daughter

(b) Section 80D - Medical insurance premium           28,000
     (fully allowed since she is a senior citizen)

(c) Section 80E - Interest on loan taken for          55,000 1,83,000
     higher education is deductible

Total income                                                  2,39,900

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            9.50         INCOME TAX LAW

    Notes:

    (i) The principal amount received towards income-tax refund will be
           excluded from computation of total income. Interest received will be
           taxed under the head "Income from other sources".

    (ii) Winnings from game show on T.V. should be grossed up for the
           chargeability under the head "Income from other sources" (` 35,000 +
           ` 15,000). Thereafter, while computing tax liability, TDS of ` 15,000
           should be deducted to arrive at the tax payable. Winnings from game
           show are subject to tax @30% as per section 115BB.

    (iii) Dr. Niranjana would not be eligible for deduction u/s 80GG under
           normal provisions of the Act, as she owns a house in Surat, a place
           where she is residing as well as carrying on her profession.

4.  Computation of total income and tax liability of Ms. Purvi for

    the A.Y. 2026-27 under default tax regime under section 115BAC

                         Particulars                    `          `
                                                                  57,820
    Income from house property (See Working Note 1)             9,20,200

    Profit and gains of business or profession
    (See Working Note 2)

    Income from other sources (See Working Note 3)                  33,924

    Gross Total Income                                          10,11,944

    Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A [not allowable              -

    under default tax regime]

    Total Income                                                10,11,944

    Total Income (rounded off)                                  10,11,940

    Tax on total income

    Upto ` 4,00,000                                        Nil

    ` 4,00,001 - ` 8,00,000 @5%                         20,000

    ` 8,00,001 - ` 10,11,940 @10%                       21,194      41,194

    Less: Rebate under section 87A, since the total                 41,194
            income does not exceed ` 12 lakhs

    Tax liability                                                   Nil

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                  9.51      a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Computation of total income and tax liability
       under normal provisions of the Act

                     Particulars                      `            `

Gross Total Income                                              10,11,944
[Income under the "Income from house property"
"Profits and gains from business or profession" and
"Income from other sources" would remain the same
even if Ms. Purvi opts out of the default tax regime
under section 115BAC]

Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A (See Working                   10,000

Note 4)

Total Income                                                    10,01,944

Total Income (rounded off)                                      10,01,940

Tax on total income

Upto ` 2,50,000                                          Nil

` 2,50,001 ­ ` 5,00,000 @5%                           12,500

` 5,00,000 - ` 10,00,000 @20%                         1,00,000

` 10,00,000 ­ ` 10,01,940 @ 30%                          582 1,13,082

Add: Health and Education cess @ 4%                                4,523

Total tax liability                                             1,17,605

Total tax liability (rounded off)                               1,17,610

Since tax liability under default tax regime under section 115BAC is less as
compared to tax liability under the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act,
1961, it would be beneficial for Ms. Purvi to pay tax under default tax
regime under section 115BAC.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.52  INCOME TAX LAW

Working Notes:                                       `          `
(1) Income from House Property                       85,600  57,820

                              Particulars             3,000
        Gross Annual Value under section 23(1)       82,600
        Less: Municipal taxes paid                   24,780
        Net Annual Value (NAV)
        Less: Deduction u/s 24@30% of NAV

   Note - Rent received has been taken as the Gross Annual Value in the
   absence of other information relating to Municipal Value, Fair Rent

   and Standard Rent.

(2) Income under the head "Profits & Gains of Business or
       Profession"

         Particulars                                 `            `
                                                              9,28,224
   Net profit as per Income and Expenditure account
                                                              1,13,000
   Add: Expenses debited but not allowable                   10,41,224

   (i) Salary paid to computer specialist in cash 30,000         10,500
        disallowed u/s 40A(3), since such cash               10,51,724
        payment exceeds ` 10,000

   (ii) Amount paid for purchase of car is not 80,000
        allowable under section 37(1) since it is a
        capital expenditure

   (ii) Municipal taxes paid in respect of 3,000
        residential flat let out

   Add: Value of benefit received from clients
   during the course of profession [taxable as
   business income under section 28(iv)]

   Less: Income credited but not taxable under
   this head:

   (i) Dividend on shares of X Ltd., an Indian 10,524
        company (taxable under the head "Income
        from other sources")

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.53           a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

(ii) Income from UTI (taxable under the head 7,600
     "Income from other sources")

(iii) Honorarium for valuation of answer papers 15,800

(iv) Rent received from letting out of 85,600                     1,19,524
     residential flat
                                                                  9,32,200
Less: Depreciation on motor car @15% (See                            12,000
Note (i) below)
                                                                  9,20,200

Notes :

(i) It has been assumed that the motor car was put to use for more
       than 180 days during the previous year and hence, full
       depreciation @ 15% has been provided for under section
       32(1)(ii).

Note: Alternatively, the question can be solved by assuming that
motor car has been put to use for less than 180 days and
accordingly, only 50% of depreciation would be allowable as per
the second proviso below section 32(1)(ii).

(ii) Incentive to articled assistants for passing CA Intermediate
       examination in their first attempt is deductible under section
       37(1).

(iii) Repairs and maintenance paid in advance for the period 1.4.2026
       to 30.9.2026 i.e. for 6 months amounting to ` 1,000 is allowable
       since Ms. Purvi is following the cash system of accounting.

(iv) ` 32,000 expended on foreign tour is allowable as deduction
       assuming that it was incurred in connection with her
       professional work. Since it has already been debited to income
       and expenditure account, no further adjustment is required.

(3) Income from other sources                                         `
                                                                     10,524
                                        Particulars
        Dividend on shares of X Ltd., an Indian company (taxable
        in the hands of shareholders)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    a  9.54         INCOME TAX LAW

            Income from UTI (taxable in the hands of unit holders)      7,600
            Honorarium for valuation of answer papers                 15,800
                                                                      33,924
    (4) Deduction under Chapter VI-A:
                                        Particulars                     `
                                                                      10,000
            Deduction under section 80C (Investment in NSC)
            Deduction under section 80D (See Notes (i) & (ii) below)       Nil
            Total deduction under Chapter VI-A                        10,000

       Notes:

       (i) Premium paid to insure the health of brother is not eligible for
              deduction under section 80D, even though he is a dependent, since
              brother is not included in the definition of "family" under section 80D.

       (ii) Premium paid to insure the health of major son is not eligible for
              deduction, even though he is a dependent, since payment is made in cash.

5.     Computation of total income of Mr. Y for the A.Y. 2026-27

                    Particulars                                       `

    Profits and gains of business or profession (See Working          11,21,500
    Note 1 below)                                                         54,500

    Income from other sources (See Working Note 2 below)

    Gross Total Income                                                11,76,000
    Less: Deduction under section 80C (Investment in NSC)                  15,000

    Total Income                                                      11,61,000

    Working Notes:

    1. Computation of profits and gains of business or profession

                               Particulars                 `          `

       Net profit as per profit and loss account                      11,20,000

       Add: Expenses debited to profit and loss            2,500
                account but not allowable as
                deduction
                Salary paid to brother disallowed to the
                extent considered unreasonable [Section
                40A(2)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                     9.55    a
                              AND OPTIMISATION           19,500

              Motor car expenses attributable to         55,000
              personal use not allowable (` 78,000 × ¼)
                                                         10,000
              Depreciation debited in the books of
              account                                    15,000   1,02,000
                                                                 12,22,000
              Drawings (not allowable since it is
              personal in nature) [See Note (iii)]                   12,000
              Investment in NSC [See Note (iii)]                 12,34,000

Add: Under statement of closing stock                                 8,000

Less: Under statement of opening stock

Less:  Contribution to a University approved
       and notified u/s 35(1)(ii) is eligible for
       100% deduction. Since whole of the                                   -
       actual contribution (100%) has been                       12,26,000
       debited to profit and loss account, no
       further adjustment is required.

Less: Incomes credited to profit and loss                22,000
         account but not taxable as business             17,500
         income
         Income from UTI [taxable under the head         15,000     54,500
         "Income from other sources"]

         Interest on debentures (taxable under
         the head "Income from other sources")

         Winnings from horse races (taxable under
         the head "Income from other sources")

                                                                 11,71,500

Less: Depreciation allowable under the                                50,000
         Income-tax Rules, 1962                                  11,21,500

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    a  9.56  INCOME TAX LAW

       Notes:
       (i) Advertisement expenses of revenue nature, namely, gift of dry

              fruits to important customers, is incurred wholly and exclusively
              for business purposes. Hence, the same is allowable as
              deduction under section 37.

       (ii) Disallowance under section 40A(3) is not attracted in respect of
              cash payment exceeding ` 10,000 to A & Co., a goods transport
              operator, since, in case of payment made for plying, hiring or
              leasing goods carriages, an increased limit of ` 35,000 is
              applicable (i.e. payment of upto ` 35,000 can be made in cash
              without attracting disallowance under section 40A(3))

       (iii) Since drawings and investment in NSC have been given effect to
              in the profit and loss account, the same have to be added back
              to arrive at the business income.

       (iv) In point no. 9 of the question, it has been given that
              depreciation as per Income-tax Rules, 1962 is ` 50,000. It has
              been assumed that, in the said figure of ` 50,000, only the
              proportional depreciation (i.e., 75% for business purposes) has
              been included in respect of motor car.

    2. Computation of "Income from Other Sources"

                                      Particulars                 `
       Dividend from UTI                                         22,000
       Interest on debentures                                    17,500
       Winnings from races                                       15,000

                                                                 54,500

6.           Computation of total income of Balamurugan

             for the A.Y. 2026-27

             Particulars                               `         `

    Salaries                                           3,70,000
    Less: Loss from house property (Cannot be set off            - 3,70,000
    against income under any other head)

    Profits and gains of business or profession        1,00,000
    Speculation business income

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
 INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                     9.57       a
                               AND OPTIMISATION        (1,00,000)

Less: Business loss of ` 1,35,000 set-off to the                Nil
extent of ` 1,00,000
                                                           70,000
Balance current year business loss of ` 35,000 to        (35,000)
be set-off against long-term capital gain
Capital Gains                                                           35,000
Long term capital gain
Less: Balance current year business loss set-off                     5,00,000
Long term capital gain after set off of business loss                9,05,000
Income from other sources
Lottery winnings (Gross)
Total Income

Computation of tax liability for A.Y.2026-27

                                   Particulars                           `
On total income of ` 3,70,000 (excluding lottery winning and                Nil
LTCG)
                                                                           625
On LTCG of ` 5,000 @12.5% (balance unexhausted basic                 1,50,000
exemption limit of ` 30,000 can be adjusted against LTCG
taxable u/s 112)

On lottery winnings of ` 5,00,000 @ 30%

                                                                     1,50,625

Add: Health and Education cess @ 4%                                     6,025

Total tax liability                                                  1,56,650

The assessee need not pay advance tax since the total income (excluding
lottery income) liable to tax is below the basic exemption limit. Further, in
respect of lottery income, tax would have been deducted at source @ 30%
under section 194B. Since the remaining tax liability of ` 6,650 (` 1,56,650 ­
` 1,50,000) is less than ` 10,000, advance tax liability is not attracted.

Note - The first proviso to section 234C(1) provides that since it is not
possible for the assessee to estimate his income from lotteries and capital
gains, the entire amount of tax payable (after considering TDS, if any) on
such income should be paid in the remaining instalments of advance tax

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    a  9.58                  INCOME TAX LAW

    which are due. Where no such instalment is due, the entire tax should be
    paid by 31st March, 2026. The first proviso to section 234C(1) would be
    attracted only in case of non-deduction or short-deduction of tax at source
    under section 194B. In this case, it has been assumed that tax deductible at
    source under section 194B has been fully deducted from lottery income.
    Since the remaining tax liability of ` 6,650 (` 1,56,650 ­ ` 1,50,000) is less
    than ` 10,000, advance tax liability is not attracted.

7.     Computation of total income of Mr. Rajiv for the A.Y.2026-27

                 Particulars                               `          `              `
                                                                                   (46,000)
    Income from house property                                  Nil
    Self-occupied
    Annual value                                           44,000
                                                                         (44,000)
    Less: Deduction under section 24(b)
    Interest on housing loan                               60,000
    50% of ` 88,000 = 44,000

    Loss from self-occupied property

    Let out property
    Annual value (Rent receivable has been
    taken as the annual value in the absence
    of other information)

    Less: Deductions u/s 24

    30% of Net Annual Value                        18,000

    Interest on housing loan

    (50% of ` 88,000)                              44,000  62,000 (2,000)

    Loss from house property

    Profits and gains of business or                                  59,38,000
    profession

    Fees from professional services

    Less: Expenses allowable as deduction

    Staff salary, bonus and stipend                        21,50,000

    Other administrative expenses                          11,48,000

    Office rent                                            30,000

    Motor car maintenance (10,000 x 4/5)                   8,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                         9.59       a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Car loan interest ­ not allowable (since           Nil 33,36,000
the same has not been paid and the
assessee follows cash system of
accounting)

Less: Depreciation                                           26,02,000

Motor car ` 4,25,000 x 7.5% x 4/5                  25,500

Books being annual publications@40%                8,000

Furniture and fittings@10% of ` 60,000             6,000

Plant and machinery@15% of ` 80,000                12,000

Computer@40% of ` 50,000                           20,000

Computer (New) ` 30,000 @ 40% x 50%                6,000 77,500 25,24,500

Gross Total income                                                      24,78,500
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A

Deduction under section 80C                        1,00,000
Housing loan principal repayment

PPF subscription                                   20,000

Life insurance premium                             24,000

Total amount of ` 1,44,000 is allowed as                     1,44,000
deduction since it is within the limit of
` 1,50,000

Deduction under section 80D

Medical insurance premium paid                               18,000 1,62,000

Total income                                                            23,16,500

8. Computation of total income and tax liability of Siddhant under default
                    tax regime under section 115BAC for the A.Y. 2026-27

                              Particulars                    `             `
Salary Income
Salary including dearness allowance                                        4,35,000
Bonus                                                                        15,000
Value of perquisites:
(i) Salary of servant                                        12,000
(ii) Free gas, electricity and water                         11,000 23,000

                                                                         4,73,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.60                 INCOME TAX LAW

Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)                        75,000

                                                                     3,98,000

Income from house property                                   42,000
Gross Annual Value (GAV) (Rent receivable is taken as
GAV in the absence of other information) (` 3,500 × 12)

Less: Municipal taxes paid                                   4,300

Net Annual Value (NAV)                                       37,700

Less: Deductions under section 24

(i) 30% of NAV                                     ` 11,310

(ii) Interest on loan from LIC @15%                ` 24,000 35,310 2,390
       of ` 1,60,000 [See Note 2]                                   2,700

Income from speculative business
Income from share speculation business

Less: Loss of ` 4,200 from cotton speculation business

set-off to the extent of ` 2,700                             2,700   Nil

Balance loss of ` 1,500 from cotton speculation
business has to be carried forward to the next year as
it cannot be set off against any other head of income.

Income from Other Sources                                    3,800
(i) Income on account of interest earned from advancing

     money gifted to his minor son is includible in the
     hands of Siddhant as per section 64(1A) [Exemption
     under section 10(32) would not be available]

(ii) Interest income earned from advancing money             5,700
     gifted to wife has to be clubbed with the income
     of the assessee as per section 64(1)

(iii) Gift received from four friends (taxable under

   section 56(2)(x) as the aggregate amount received

   during the year exceeds ` 50,000)                         1,20,000 1,29,500

Gross Total Income                                                   5,29,890
Deduction under section 80C [No deduction under                              Nil
Chapter VI-A would be allowed as per section
115BAC(2)]

Total Income                                                         5,29,890

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                       9.61  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

                                   Particulars                      `
Tax on total income [5% of ` 1,29,890 (` 5,29,890 -                 6,495
` 4,00,000]
Less: Rebate u/s 87A, since total income does not exceed            6,495
` 12,00,000                                                            Nil

Tax liability

Computation of total income and tax liability of Siddhant
 for the A.Y. 2026-27 under normal provisions of the Act

              Particulars                                  `         `
                                                                 5,29,890
Gross total income (as per default scheme)
Add: Standard Deduction [` 25,000 being excess                      25,000
amount allowed under section 115BAC]
                                                                      1,500
Less: Exemption u/s 10(32) in respect of interest                5,53,390
income of minor son included in the hands of
Siddhant                                                            50,000
                                                                 5,03,390
Gross total income (under the                      normal
provisions of the Act)

Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A

Under section 80C [Contribution to PPF]

Total Income

                                   Particulars                         `
Tax on total income [5% of ` 2,50,000 + 20% of ` 3,390]
Add: HEC @4%                                                        13,178
                                                                        527
Tax liability
Tax liability (Rounded off)                                         13,705
                                                                    13,710

Since his total income as per the normal provisions of the Act exceeds
` 5,00,000, he would not be eligible for rebate under section 87A.

Since Mr. Siddhant is not liable to pay any tax under default tax regime

under section 115BAC, it would be beneficial for him to not to exercise the
option of shift out of the default tax regime for A.Y.2026-27.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a       9.62  INCOME TAX LAW

Notes:

(1) It is assumed that the entire loan of ` 1,60,000 is outstanding as on
       31.3.2026;

(2) Since Siddhant's own flat in a co-operative housing society, which he
       has rented out to a nationalized bank, is also in Delhi, he is not
       eligible for deduction under section 80GG in respect of rent paid by
       him for his accommodation in Delhi, since one of the conditions to be
       satisfied for claiming deduction under section 80GG is that the
       assessee should not own any residential accommodation in the same
       place.

9. Computation of Total Income and tax liability of Mr. Ramdin for
                      the A.Y.2026-27 under normal provisions of the Act

                             Particulars                 `       `
   Income from Salaries
   Basic Salary (` 15,000 x 12)                                  1,80,000
   Dearness Allowance (` 12,000 x12)                             1,44,000
   Commission on Turnover (0.5% of ` 50 lakhs)
   Bonus                                                           25,000
                                                                   50,000

   Gratuity (See Note 1)                                         30,000
   Employer's contribution to recognized provident fund

   Actual contribution [20% of ` 1,80,000]               36,000           2,760
                                                         33,240
   Less: Exempt (See Note 2)                             15,000
   Interest credited in recognized provident fund
   account @15% p.a.

   Less: Exempt upto 9.5% p.a.                           9,500    5,500
                                                                 10,000
   Gift of gold ring worth ` 10,000 on 25th wedding
   anniversary by employer (See Note 3)                           8,500
   Perquisite value of music system given for
   personal use (being 10% of actual cost) i.e. 10%
   of ` 85,000

   Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)                 4,55,760
                                                                   50,000

                                                                 4,05,760

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                   9.63    a
                              AND OPTIMISATION                       1,80,000

Profits and Gains of Business or Profession            5,860      13,400
Lease of 2 light goods vehicles on contract basis      7,540   5,99,160
against fixed charges of ` 6,500 p.m. In this case,
presumptive tax provisions of section 44AE will        15,370  1,25,370
apply i.e. ` 7,500 p.m. for each of the two light      30,000
goods vehicle (` 7,500 x 2 x 12). He cannot claim      50,000
lower profits and gains since he has not               30,000
maintained books of account.
                                                                  22,500
Income from Other Sources                                         10,600
Interest on bank FDRs                                          4,40,690

Interest on debentures                                            9,535

Gross total Income                                                9,535
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A                                  Nil

14BSection 80C
Premium on life insurance policy

Investment in NSC

FDR of SBI for 5 years

Employee's contribution to recognized provident
fund

Section 80D ­ Mediclaim Insurance
Section 80G (See Note 4)
Total Income
Tax on total income
Income-tax [5% of ` 1,90,690 (i.e., ` 4,40,690 ­
` 2,50,000)

Less: Rebate u/s 87A, since total income does not
exceed ` 5,00,000

Tax liability

Notes:
1. Gratuity received during service is fully taxable.

2. Employer's contribution in the recognized provident fund is exempt
       up to 12% of the salary i.e. 12% of (Basic Salary + DA for retirement
       benefits + Commission based on turnover)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     a  9.64             INCOME TAX LAW

        = 12% of (` 1,80,000+ (50% of ` 1,44,000) + ` 25,000)

        = 12% of 2,77,000 = ` 33,240

     3. An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is
            taxable in view of the language of Circular No.15/2001 dated
            12.12.2001 that such gifts upto ` 5,000 in the aggregate per annum
            would be exempt, beyond which it would be taxed as a perquisite. As
            per this view, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000. In such a case
            the Income from Salaries would be ` 4,00,760.

     4. Deduction under section 80G is computed as under:

                                        Particulars                `
        Donation to PM National Relief Fund (100%)                5,100

        Donation to institution approved under section 80G (50%   5,500
        of ` 11,000) (amount contributed ` 11,000 or 10% of
        Adjusted Total Income i.e. ` 45,129, whichever is lower)

        Total deduction                                           10,600

        Adjusted Total Income = Gross Total Income - Deductions under
        section 80C and 80D = ` 5,99,160 - ` 1,47,870 = ` 4,51,290.

10.     Computation of total income of Mr. X for A.Y.2026-27

                                Particulars             `         `
     Income from Salaries
     Basic salary (` 25,000 x 9 months)                           2,25,000
     House rent allowance:
     Actual amount received (` 6,000 x 9 months)        54,000    18,000
     Less : Exemption under section 10(13A)(Note 1)     36,000
     Gratuity:
     Actual amount received                             3,50,000
     Less: Exemption under section 10(10)(ii) (Note 2)
     Leave encashment:                                  3,50,000     -
     Actual amount received
     Less : Exemption under section 10(10AA) (Note 3)   3,15,000     70,000
     Gross Salary                                       2,45,000  3,13,000
     Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)
                                                                     50,000
                                                                  2,63,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
 INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                 9.65       a
                               AND OPTIMISATION
                                                                    Nil
Profits and gains of business or profession                 2,63,000
Business loss of ` 80,000 to be carried forward as
the same cannot be set off against salary income            1,00,000
                                                            1,63,000
Gross Total income
Less : Deduction under section 80C                                  Nil

Deposit in Public Provident Fund

Total income
Tax on total income (Nil, since it is lower than the
basic exemption limit of ` 2,50,000)

Notes:
(1) As per section 10(13A), house rent allowance will be exempt to the

       extent of least of the following three amounts:

(i) HRA actually received (` 6,000 x 9)                             `
(ii) Rent paid in excess of 10% of salary (` 6,500 ­               54,000
                                                                   36,000
     ` 2,500) x 9 months
(iii) 50% of salary                                              1,12,500

(2) Gratuity of ` 3,50,000 is exempt under section 10(10)(ii), being the
       minimum of the following amounts:

(i) Actual amount received                                            `
(ii) Half month salary for each year of completed                 3,50,000
                                                                  3,75,000
     service [(` 25,000 x 15/26) x 26 years]
(iii) Statutory limit                                            20,00,000

(3) Leave encashment is exempt upto the least of the following:

(i) Actual amount received                                            `
                                                                  3,15,000
(ii) 10 months average salary (` 24,500 x 10)                     2,45,000
(iii) Cash equivalent of unavailed leave calculated on the
                                                                  3,18,500
     basis of maximum 30 days for every year of actual           25,00,000
     service rendered to the employer from whose
     service he retired (See Note 4 below)
(iv) Statutory limit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a      9.66  INCOME TAX LAW

(4) Since the leave entitlement of Mr. X as per his employer's rules is 30
       days credit for each year of service and he had accumulated 15 days
       per annum during the period of his service, he would have
       availed/taken the balance 15 days leave every year.

       Leave entitlement of Mr. X on the           = 30 days/year x 26 = 780 days
       basis of 30 days for every year of
       actual service rendered by him to
       the employer

       Less: Leave taken /availed by Mr. X

       during the period of his service            = 15 days/year x 26 = 390 days

       Earned leave to the credit of Mr. X                                 390 days
       at the time of his retirement

       Cash equivalent of earned leave =390  ` 24,500/30 = ` 3,18,500
       to the credit of Mr. X at the time
       of his retirement

11. Computation of total income of Mrs. Rosy and Mrs. Mary for the A.Y.2026-27

   S.        Particulars                                           Mrs.    Mrs. Mary
                                                                   Rosy          (ROR)
No.                                                              (Non-                  `
                                                             resident)
   (I) Salaries                                    ` 60,000                     10,000
          Pension recd from State Govt.                                 `               -

       Less: Standard deduction u/s                ` 50,000             -       10,000
       16(ia)                                                           -       30,000

       Pension received from Canadian                                   -
       Government is not taxable in the case of a                60,000
       non-resident since it is earned and
       received outside India

(II) Income from house property

       Rent received from house property at
       Mumbai (assumed to be the annual value in
       the absence of other information i.e.
       municipal value, fair rent and standard rent)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.67       a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Less: Deduction u/s 24(a)@30%                      18,000          9,000
                                                                21,000
                                                   42,000     1,00,000

(III) Capital gains                                1,00,000   2,50,000
        Long-term capital gain on sale of land at             3,50,000
        Mumbai                                                3,81,000

Short term capital gain on sale of shares of       20,000        10,000
Indian listed companies in respect of which                              -
STT was paid
                                                                 20,000
                                                   1,20,000     30,000
                                                                 25,000
(A) Gross Total Income [(I)+(II)+(III)]            1,62,000     55,000
        Less: Deductions under Chapter VIA
                                                                 31,000
1. Deduction u/s 80C                                          3,50,000

1. LIC Premium paid                                      -

2. Premium paid to Canadian Life                   40,000
     Insurance Corporation

3. Deposit in PPF                                        -

2. Deduction u/s 80D ­ Mediclaim premium           40,000
      paid                                                 -

(B) Total deduction under Chapter VI-A is          40,000
        restricted to income other than capital    40,000

        gains taxable under sections 111A & 112

(C) Total income (A-B)                             1,22,000

Tax liability of Mrs. Rosy for A.Y.2026-27         12,500
Tax on long-term capital gains @12.5% of
` 1,00,000

Tax on short-term capital gains @20% of            4,000
` 20,000

Tax on balance income of ` 2,000                   Nil

                                                   16,500

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a       9.68  INCOME TAX LAW

        Tax liability of Mrs. Mary for A.Y.2026-27              12,500
        Tax on LTCG @12.5% of ` 1,00,000                             Nil

        Tax on STCG of ` 2,50,000 (unexhausted
        basic exemption limit of ` 2,50,000 is
        adjusted)

        Less: Rebate u/s 87A would be lower of                  12,500
        ` 12,500 or tax liability, since total income           12,500
        does not exceed ` 5,00,000
                                                                     Nil
        Add: Health and Education cess@4%                  660       Nil
        Total tax liability                            17,160       Nil

Notes:

(1) In case of resident individuals, if the basic exemption limit is not fully
       exhausted against other income, then the long-term capital gains u/s
       112/short-term capital gains u/s 111A will be reduced by the
       unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance will be taxed
       as per rates u/s 112/111A. However, this benefit is not available to
       non-residents. Therefore, while Mrs. Mary can adjust unexhausted
       basic exemption limit against long-term capital gains taxable under
       section 112 and short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A,
       Mrs. Rosy cannot do so.

(2) Since long-term capital gains is taxable at the rate of 12.5% and short-
       term capital gains is taxable at the rate of 20%, it is more beneficial for
       Mrs. Mary to exhaust her basic exemption limit of ` 2,50,000 against
       short-term capital gains of ` 2,50,000.

(3) Rebate under section 87A would not be available to Mrs. Rosy even
       though her total income does not exceed ` 5,00,000, since she is non-
       resident for the A.Y. 2026-27.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                                9.69       a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

12. Computation of total income of Mr. Rishabh for A.Y. 2026-27
                      (under default tax regime under section 115BAC)

     Particulars                                          `         `             `

I Income from business or                                           82,45,000
      profession

      Net profit as per profit and
      loss account

Add: Items of expenditure

not  allowable                                     while

computing business income

(i) Interest on loan taken for                            1,53,125

purchase of plant &
machinery

[Interest from the date on

which capital was
borrowed till the date on

which asset was first put
to use, not allowable as

deduction under section

36(1)(iii).       Accordingly,

interest of ` 1,53,125

[` 50,00,000 x 10.5% x

3.5/12] has to be added

back, since the same is

debited to the profit and

loss account]

(ii) Purchase of goods at a                               5,00,000 6,53,125
    price higher than the fair
    market value

    [The difference between
    the purchase price (` 40
    lakhs) and the fair market
    value (` 35 lakhs) has to
    be added back as per
    section 40A(2) since the
    purchase is from a related
    party, i.e., his brother and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.70              INCOME TAX LAW

   at a price higher than the
   fair market value]

                                                                   88,98,125

   Less: Items of income to be
   treated separately under the
   respective head of income

   (i) Income-tax                                  refund  15,550

   including interest on

   refund of ` 4,550

   (ii) Dividend from Indian 15,00,000
       companies

   (iii) Short term capital gains on                       10,00,000
       transfer of listed equity                                           25,15,550
       shares

                                                                   63,82,575

   Less: Depreciation on interest
   on loan capitalized to plant
   and machinery

   ` 1,53,125, being the amount of
   interest on loan taken for
   purchase of plant and machinery
   from the date on which capital
   was borrowed till the date on
   which asset was first put to use,
   shall be capitalized

   Normal depreciation @15% x                                      11,484
   50% on such interest

                                                                   63,71,091

   Add: Additional depreciation                                    6,50,000
   on newly plant and
   machinery [Not allowable
   under default tax regime]

   [` 65,00,000 x 20% x 50%]

                                                                                      70,21,091

   II Capital Gains

   Short term capital gains on                                                        10,00,000
   transfer of listed equity shares

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION                         a  9.71      a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

III Income from Other Sources                                      4,550
      Interest on income-tax refund                           15,00,000 15,04,550

Dividend         from                              Indian                     95,25,641

companies

Gross Total Income
Less: Deductions under Chapter
VI-A

- Deduction under section 80C                                                 Nil
[Not allowable under default                                                  Nil
tax regime]

- Deduction under section 80D
[Not allowable under default
tax regime]

Total Income

Total Income (Rounded off)                                              95,25,641
                                                                        95,25,640

Computation of tax payable under default tax regime

                          Particulars                         `            `
Tax on total income of ` 95,25,640
Tax on STCG of ` 10,00,000@20% u/s 111A                                 2,00,000

Tax on remaining total income of ` 85,25,640

Upto ` 4,00,000                                                  Nil

` 4,00,001 ­ ` 8,00,000 [@5% of ` 4 lakhs]                    20,000

` 8,00,001 ­ ` 12,00,000 [@10% of ` 4 lakhs]                  40,000

` 12,00,001 ­ ` 16,00,000 [@15% of ` 4 lakhs]                 60,000

` 16,00,001 ­ ` 20,00,000 [@20% of ` 4 lakhs]                 80,000

` 20,00,001 ­ ` 24,00,000 [@25% of ` 4 lakhs]                 1,00,000

` 24,00,001 ­ ` 85,25,640 [@30% of ` 61,25,640] 18,37,692 21,37,692

                                                                        23,37,692

Add: Surcharge @10%, since total income                                  2,33,769
exceeds ` 50,00,000 but does not exceed ` 1                             25,71,461
crore

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.72                 INCOME TAX LAW

Add: Health and education cess@4%                                1,02,858
                                                                26,74,319
Total tax liability                                  1,00,000
Less: TDS u/s 194N @ 2% on ` 50 lakhs, being                    18,50,000
the cash withdrawals exceeding ` 1 crore                        8,24,319
                                                                8,24,320
Less: Advance tax paid                               17,50,000

Tax payable

Tax payable (rounded off)

Computation of total income of Mr. Rishabh under optional tax regime
                                        for A.Y. 2026-27

             Particulars                             `              `
                                                                95,25,641
Gross Total Income as per default tax regime

Less: Additional depreciation on plant and
machinery

- On interest which is capitalised                   15,313

- On cost of plant and machinery [` 65 lakhs x 6,50,000 6,65,313
      20% x 50%]

Gross Total Income as per normal provisions of                   88,60,328
the Act                                              40,000

- Deduction under section 80C
Life insurance premium for married daughter
[Allowable as deduction though she is not
dependent, since child of an individual whether
dependent or not falls within the meaning of term
"Person". Accordingly, whole of the amount of
` 40,000 is allowable as it does not exceed 10% of
the ` 5, 00,000, being the sum assured]

- Deduction under section 80D                        25,000     65,000
Health insurance premium for self, spouse and
children [Allowable as deduction, since it is paid
otherwise than by way of cash. However, it is to be
restricted to ` 25,000

Total Income                                                    87,95,328
Total Income (Rounded off)                                      87,95,330

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                   9.73       a
                                   AND OPTIMISATION

     Computation of tax payable under optional tax regime

                      Particulars                           `              `
                                                                        2,00,000
     Tax on total income of ` 87,95,330
     Tax on short term capital gains on transfer of listed             21,51,099
                                                                       23,51,099
     equity shares @20% u/s 111A
                                                                        2,35,110
     Tax on other Income of ` 77,95,330                                25,86,209

     Upto ` 2,50,000                                           Nil      1,03,448
                                                                       26,89,657
     ` 2,50,001 ­ ` 5,00,000 [@5% of ` 2.50 lakh]           12,500
                                                                       18,50,000
     ` 5,00,001 ­ ` 10,00,000 [@20% of ` 5,00,000]          1,00,000

     ` 10,00,001- ` 77,95,330 [@30% of ` 67,95,330]         20,38,599

     Add: Surcharge @10%, since total income exceeds
     ` 50,00,000 but does not exceed ` 1 crore

     Add: Health and education cess@4%

     Total tax liability                                    1,00,000
     Less: TDS u/s 194N @ 2% on ` 50 lakhs, being the
     cash withdrawals exceeding ` 1 crore

     Less: Advance tax paid                                 17,50,000

     Tax payable                                                       8,39,657
     Tax payable (rounded off)                                         8,39,660

     Since tax payable as per section 115BAC is lower than the tax payable as per
     normal provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, it is beneficial for
     Mr. Rishabh to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC for
     A.Y. 2026-27.

13.  Computation of total income of Mr. Sunil for A.Y. 2026-27

     (under default tax regime under section 115BAC)

                      Particulars                   `       `             `

     I Income from house property

     Let out portion [First floor]

     Gross Annual Value [Rent received is                   2,95,000
     taken as GAV, in the absence of

     other information]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.74           INCOME TAX LAW

   Less: Municipal taxes paid by him in                                   12,500
   the P.Y. 2025-26 pertaining to let out                               2,82,500
   portion [` 25,000/2]                                     84,750
                                                            75,000 1,59,750
   Net Annual Value (NAV)                                               1,22,750
   Less: Deduction u/s 24
                                                                                Nil
   (a) 30% of ` 2,82,500
                                                                                Nil
   (b) Interest on housing loan                                                 Nil
        [` 1,50,000/2]
                                                                                         1,22,750
   Self-occupied  portion                          [Ground                              40,00,000
   Floor]
                                                                      16,00,000
   Annual Value
                                                                        4,00,000 12,00,000
   [No deduction is allowable in respect
   of municipal taxes paid]

   Less: Interest on housing loan [Not
   allowable under section 115BAC]

     Income from house property

II Profits and gains of business or
     profession
     Income from SEZ unit

III Capital Gains
     Long-term capital gains on sale of
     land (since held for more than 24
     months)
     Full Value of Consideration [Actual
     consideration of ` 16 lakhs, since
     stamp duty value of ` 17 lakhs does
     not exceed 110% of actual
     consideration of ` 16 lakhs]

     Less: Cost of acquisition [` 4,00,000]
     (As transfer is on or after 23.07.2024,
     the indexation benefit would not be
     available)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a               9.75    a
                                  AND OPTIMISATION
                                                       30,000       70,000
     Cost of acquisition                               40,000  53,92,750

     Higher of -                                               7,12,800
     - Actual cost ` 2.80 lakhs + ` 0.12
                                                               46,79,950
        lakhs = ` 2.92 lakhs and

     - Fair Market Value (FMV) as on
        1.4.2001 = ` 4.8 lakhs but cannot
        exceed stamp duty value of ` 4
        lakhs.

IV Income from Other Sources
     Interest on savings bank deposits

     Interest on fixed deposits

     Gross Total Income
     Less: Deduction under Chapter
     VI-A
     Deduction under section 80JJAA
     30% of the employee cost of the new
     employees employed during the P.Y.
     2025-26 for 240 days or more during
     the P.Y. 2025-26 allowable as
     deduction [30% of ` 23,76,000 (12 x
     18,000 x 11)]
     As per section 115BAC, no deduction
     under section 10AA or under Chapter
     VI-A is allowable except u/s 80JJAA

     Total Income

Computation of tax liability of Mr. Sunil under section 115BAC

Particulars                                            `          `

Tax on total income of ` 46,79,950

Tax on LTCG on sale of vacant land

As the asset is a long-term capital asset, being land

acquired before 23.07.2024 and transferred on or

after 23.07.2024 by a resident individual, the tax

shall be computed @20% with indexation benefit or

@12.5% without indexation benefit, whichever is

more beneficial to the assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.76  INCOME TAX LAW

Tax @20% with indexation                                     Nil     19,200
Sale consideration = ` 16,00,000                        20,000
Indexed cost of acquisition = ` 4,00,000 x 376/100 =    40,000    6,23,985
` 15,04,000                                             60,000    6,43,185
Gain = ` 96,000                                         80,000
Tax @20% = ` 96,000 x 20% = ` 19,200                  1,00,000       25,727
Tax @12.5% without indexation                         3,23,985    6,68,912
Tax @12.5% = ` 12,00,000 x 12.5% = ` 1,50,000                     6,68,910
Tax on LTCG on sale of vacant land @20% with
indexation
Tax on remaining total income of ` 34,79,950
Upto ` 4,00,000

` 4,00,001 ­ ` 8,00,000 [@5% of ` 4 lakhs]

` 8,00,001 ­ ` 12,00,000 [@10% of ` 4 lakhs]

` 12,00,001 ­ ` 16,00,000 [@15% of ` 4 lakhs]

` 16,00,001 ­ ` 20,00,000 [@20% of ` 4 lakhs]

` 20,00,001 ­ ` 24,00,000 [@25% of ` 4 lakhs]

` 24,00,001 ­ ` 34,79,950 [@30% of ` 10,79,950]

Add: Health and education cess@4%
Total tax liability
Tax liability (Rounded off)

Note - An individual paying tax u/s 115BAC is not liable to alternate
minimum tax u/s 115JC.

14. Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y.2026-27
                      (under default tax regime under section 115BAC)

                         Particulars                  `           `
Profits and gains of business or profession
Profit from unit in SEZ                                           40,00,000

Profit from operation of warehousing facility      1,05,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                                                9.77  a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Less: Depreciation under section 32               6,50,000                                98,50,000

      On building @10% of ` 65 lakhs4 (normal
     depreciation under section 32 is allowable)

Total Income                                                                              1,38,50,000

Computation of tax liability as per section                                               37,35,000
115BAC                                                                                     5,60,250

Tax on ` 1,38,50,000

Add: Surcharge@15%

                                                                                          42,95,250

Add: Health and Education cess@4%                                                            1,71,810

Total tax liability                                                                       44,67,060

Notes:

(1) Deductions u/s 10AA and 35AD are not allowable as per section
       115BAC(2). However, normal depreciation u/s 32 is allowable.

(2) Mr. X is not liable to alternate minimum tax u/s 115JC under default
       tax regime under section 115BAC.

Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y.2026-27
        (under the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961)

                         Particulars                                                `        `
Profits and gains of business or profession
Profit from unit in SEZ                           40,00,000

Less: Deduction u/s 10AA [See Note (1) below]     16,00,000
Business income of SEZ unit chargeable to tax                      24,00,000

Profit from operation of warehousing facility     1,05,00,000

Less: Deduction u/s 35AD [See Note (2) below]     65,00,000
Business income of warehousing facility                            40,00,000
chargeable to tax
                                                                  64,00,000
Total Income

4 Assuming the capital expenditure of ` 65 lakhs is incurred entirely on buildings

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  9.78  INCOME TAX LAW

Computation of tax liability (under the normal/                                      17,32,500
regular provisions)                                                                   1,73,250
Tax on ` 64,00,000
Add: Surcharge @ 10% (since the total income                                         19,05,750
exceeds ` 50 lakhs but does not exceed ` 1 core)                                         76,230

Add: Health and Education cess@4%                                                   19,81,980
Total tax liability

   Computation of adjusted total income and AMT liability of Mr. X

                           Particulars             `                                `
   Total Income (computed above as per
   regular provisions of income tax)                                                64,00,000
   Add: Deduction under section 10AA
                                                                                    16,00,000
   Add: Deduction under section 35AD                                                80,00,000
   Less: Depreciation under section 32
                                                   65,00,000
           On building @10% of `65 lakhs5
                                                   6,50,000 58,50,000

   Adjusted Total Income                                                            1,38,50,000
   Alternate Minimum Tax@18.5%                                                         25,62,250
   Add: Surcharge@15% (since adjusted total                                              3,84,338
   income > ` 1 crore)

   Add: Health and Education cess@4%                                                29,46,588
                                                                                     1,17,863

                                                                                    30,64,451

   Tax liability u/s 115JC (rounded off)                                            30,64,450

Since the regular income-tax payable is less than the alternate minimum tax
payable, the adjusted total income shall be deemed to be the total income
and tax is leviable @18.5% thereof plus surcharge@15% and cess@4%.
Therefore, tax liability as per section 115JC is ` 30,64,450.

Since the tax liability of Mr. X under section 115JC is lower than the tax
liability as computed u/s 115BAC, it would be beneficial for him to opt out
of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for A.Y. 2026-27.

5 Assuming the capital expenditure of ` 65 lakhs is incurred entirely on buildings

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME TAX LIABILITY ­ COMPUTATION a                                  9.79               a
                              AND OPTIMISATION

Moreover, benefit of alternate minimum tax credit is also available to the
extent of tax paid in excess over regular tax.

AMT Credit to be carried forward under section 115JEE

                                                                                            `

Tax liability under section 115JC                                            30,64,450
Less: Tax liability under the regular provisions of the                      19,81,980
Income-tax Act, 1961
                                                                            10,82,470

Notes:

(1) Deduction under section 10AA in respect of Unit in SEZ =

Profit of the Unit in SEZ× ETxoptoarltttuurrnnoovveerroofftthheeUUnnititininSSEEZZx 50%

40,00,000×   80,00,000   x                         50% = ` 16,00,000
            1,00,00,000

(2) Deduction@100% of the capital expenditure is available under section
       35AD for A.Y.2026-27 in respect of specified business of setting up
       and operating a warehousing facility for storage of agricultural
       produce which commences operation on or after 01.04.2009.

Further, the expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the
purposes of such specified business, shall be allowed as deduction
during the previous year in which he commences operations of his
specified business if the expenditure is incurred prior to the
commencement of its operations and the amount is capitalized in the
books of account of the assessee on the date of commencement of its
operations.

Deduction under section 35AD would, however, not be available on
expenditure incurred on acquisition of land.

In this case, since the capital expenditure of ` 65 lakhs (i.e., ` 75 lakhs
­ ` 10 lakhs, being expenditure on acquisition of land) has been
incurred in the F.Y.2024-25 and capitalized in the books of account on
1.4.2025, being the date when the warehouse became operational,
` 65,00,000, being 100% of ` 65 lakhs would qualify for deduction
under section 35AD.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
