CHAPTER  6

DEDUCTIONS FROM
GROSS TOTAL INCOME

                                     LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to ­

 appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income
       under the default tax regime under section 115BAC;

 appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income,
       if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default
       tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and is paying tax under
       the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act;

 identify the assessees eligible for deduction under various sections;

 compute deductions in respect of payments, applying the provisions
       under the relevant sections;

 compute deductions in respect of certain income, applying the
       provisions under the relevant sections;

 compute the deduction allowable in the case of a person with disability;

 compute the deduction available under section 10AA for units
       established in SEZs considering the conditions specified thereunder.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  CHAPTER OVERVIEW                                   Deductions from Gross Total Income under the
                                                                                                 optional tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act)

                                                   Deductions under Chapter VI -A                                                                        Deduction under section 10AA                    6.2

                                                   Deductions in respect of certain              Deductions in respect of certain                 Deductions in respect of other                Other
                                                                  payments                                       incomes                                          income                     Deductions

                                                   Section 80C­ In respect of LIP, PPF, PF etc.                             Section 80JJAA ­ In respect of employment of new employees                   INCOME TAX LAW

                                                   Section 80CCC­ In respect of contribution to certain pension funds Section 80RRB ­ In respect of royalty on patents

                                                   Section 80CCD ­ In respect of contribution to pension scheme of          Section 80QQB ­ In respect of royalty income etc. of authors
                                                                          of Central Government                                                      of certain books other than text books

                                                   Section 80CCH ­ In respect of contribution to Agnipath scheme

                                                   Section 80D ­ In respect of medical insurance premium

                                                   Section 80DD ­ In repect of maintenance including medical treatment of a dependent disabled

                                                   Section 80DDB ­ In respect of amount paid for medical treatment etc. of specified disease or ailment

                                                   Section 80E ­ In respect of interest on loan taken for higher education

                                                   Section 80EE/80EEA ­ In respect of interest payable on loan borrowed for acquisition of house property by an individual

                                                   Section 80EEB ­ In respect of interest payable on loan taken for purchase of electric vehicle

                                                   Section 80G ­ In respect of donations to certain funds, charitable instutions etc.     Section 80TTA ­ In respect of interest on deposits
                                                                                                                                                                 in savings account

                                                   Section 80GG ­ In respect of rent paid                                                 Section 80TTB ­ In respect of interest on
                                                                                                                                                                 deposits in case of senior citizens

                                                   Section 80GGA ­ In respect of donations for scientific research and rural development

                                                   Section 80GGB ­ In respect of contributions given by companies to political parties            Section 80U ­ Deduction in case of a
                                                                                                                                                                    person with disability

                                                   Section 80GGC ­In respect of contributions given by any person to political parties

                                                   Note ­ Only deductions u/s 80CCD(2) [Employer's contribution to pension scheme of Central Government], 80CCH(2) [Central
                                                   Government's contribution to assessee's account in Agniveer Corpus Fund] and section 80JJAA would be available if the eligible assessee
                                                   pays tax at concessional rates of tax u/s 115BAC under the default tax regime.
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.3

    1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

The various items of income referred to in the different clauses of section 10 are
excluded from the total income of an assessee. These incomes are known as
exempted incomes. "Exemption" means exclusion. A particular income exempt
from tax under section 10 shall not enter into the computation of taxable income.
However, there are certain items of income referred to in section 10 which are not
exempted if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax
regime u/s 115BAC, namely,

 10(5)   Leave travel concession
10(13A)
 10(14)  House Rent Allowance

 10(17)  Special Allowances except -
 10(32)  (a) Travelling allowance
         (b) Daily allowance
         (c) Conveyance allowance
         (d) Transport allowance to blind/deaf and dumb/orthopedically

              handicapped employee

         Daily allowance/Constituency allowance received by any Member of
         Parliament or of State Legislatures

         Exemption in respect of income of minor child included in assessee's
         total income

"Deduction" in relation to Chapter VI-A and section 10AA refers to the amount that
is reduced from gross total income to arrive at the total income. There are incomes
which are included in gross total income but are wholly or partly allowed as
deduction under Chapter VI-A in computation of total income, if the assessee has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A) and pays tax as per the optional tax regime under the normal
provisions of the Act.

Deduction is allowed on specific investments or expenses incurred by the taxpayer
to promote the culture of savings and investments. This could include medical
expenditure, donations made to charities, investments made in specific avenues
such as Public Provident Fund (PPF), National Pension Scheme (NPS) etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             6.4  INCOME TAX LAW

However, if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under default tax regime
u/s 115BAC, only deduction in respect of employer's contribution to NPS u/s
80CCD(2), Central Government's contribution to Agnipath Scheme u/s 80CCH(2)
and deduction in respect of employment of new employees u/s 80JJAA would be
allowed to the assessee. He cannot claim deduction under any other provision in
Chapter VI-A under the default tax regime.

Section 10AA provides for a deduction in respect of units established in SEZ from
the total income of the assessee. Irrespective of its placement in Chapter-III,
deduction under section 10AA is allowed from the total income of the assessee. It
is available only if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). This deduction is not
available if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime
u/s 115BAC.

The tax liability is calculated on the "total income" which is arrived after reducing
permissible deductions from gross total income.

Students should note this very important difference between exemption under
section 10 and the deduction under Chapter VI-A/section 10AA.

Difference between Deduction under Chapter VI-A & section 10AA and
                               Exemption under section 10

Particulars                 Deduction                        Exemption
                                                   (contained in section 10)
             (in relation to Chapter VI-A and
                          section 10AA)

Meaning      Investments/ contributions in         The incomes which are
             certain instruments (as prescribed    exempt under section 10 will
             under the Income-tax Act).            not be included in
             Payments made for certain             computing gross total
             purposes.                             income.

Relevant     Sections 80C to 80U in Chapter VI-A Section 10 of the Income-
Sections     and section 10AA of the Income-tax tax Act, 1961
             Act, 1961

Manner of First included in the Gross Total Not included in the Gross
treatment Income and then deductions will be Total Income.

                  allowed from Gross Total Income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                         6.5

The important point to be noted here is that if there is no gross total income, then
no deductions will be permissible. This Chapter contains deduction under Chapter
VI-A which includes deductions in respect of certain payments, deductions in
respect of certain incomes, deductions in respect of other income and other
deductions. It also includes deduction under section 10AA.

Section 80A

(i) Section 80A(1) provides that in computing the total income of an assessee,
       there shall be allowed from his gross total income, the deductions specified
       in sections 80C to 80U if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out
       of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(ii) According to section 80A(2), the aggregate amount of the deductions under
       this chapter shall not, in any case, exceed the gross total income of the
       assessee. Therefore, the total income after deductions will either be positive
       or nil. It cannot be negative due to deductions.

       An assessee cannot have a loss as a result of the deduction under Chapter
       VI-A and claim to carry forward the same for the purpose of set-off against
       his income in the subsequent year.

(iii) Section 80A(3) provides that in the case of AOP/BOI exercising the option of
       shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), if
       any deduction is admissible under section 80G/80GGA/80GGC1, no deduction
       under the same section shall be made in computing the total income of a
       member of the AOP or BOI in relation to the share of such member in the
       income of the AOP or BOI.

(iv) The profits and gains allowed as deduction under section 10AA or under any
       provision of Chapter VI-A under the heading "C.-Deductions in respect of
       certain incomes" in any assessment year, shall not be allowed as deduction
       under any other provision of the Act for such assessment year [Section
       80A(4)].

(v) The deduction, referred to in (iv) above, shall not exceed the profits and gains
       of the undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business, as the case may
       be [Section 80A(4)].

180-IA/80-IB/80-IE (these sections will be dealt with at the Final level)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.6  INCOME TAX LAW

(vi) No deduction under any of the provisions referred to in (iv) above, shall be
       allowed if the deduction has not been claimed in the return of income
       [Section 80A(5)].

(vii) The transfer price of goods and services between such undertaking or unit or
       enterprise or eligible business and any other business of the assessee shall
       be determined at the market value of such goods or services as on the date
       of transfer [Section 80A(6)].

(viii) For this purpose, the expression "market value" has been defined to mean,-

       (a) in relation to any goods or services sold or supplied, the price that such
               goods or services would fetch if these were sold by the undertaking or
               unit or enterprise or eligible business in the open market, subject to
               statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any;

       (b) in relation to any goods or services acquired, the price that such goods
               or services would cost if these were acquired by the undertaking or unit
               or enterprise or eligible business from the open market, subject to
               statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any;

(ix) Where a deduction under any provision of this Chapter under the heading "C
       ­ Deductions in respect of certain incomes" is claimed and allowed to an
       assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
       provided under section 115BAC(1A), in respect of the profits of such specified
       business for any assessment year, no deduction under section 35AD is
       permissible in relation to such specified business for the same or any other
       assessment year.

       In short, once the assessee has claimed the benefit of deduction under
       section 35AD for a particular year in respect of a specified business, he cannot
       claim benefit under Chapter VI-A under the heading "C.-Deductions in
       respect of certain incomes" for the same or any other year and vice versa.
       Further, if the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section
       115BAC, neither deduction under section 35AD nor deductions under Chapter
       VI-A under the heading "C.-Deductions in respect of certain incomes" would
       be available to him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                            6.7

Section 80AB

Deductions specified in Chapter VI-A under the heading "C.-Deductions in respect
of certain incomes", shall be allowed only to the extent such income computed in
accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is included in the gross
total income of the assessee.

Section 80AC: Furnishing return of income on or before due
date mandatory for claiming deduction under Chapter VI-A
under the heading "C. ­ Deductions in respect of certain
incomes"

(i) Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of return of income on or
       before the due date specified under section 139(1), as a pre-condition
       for availing benefit of deductions under any provision of Chapter VI-A
       under the heading "C. ­ Deductions in respect of certain incomes".

Table showing the deductions contained in Chapter VI-A under the
            heading "C. ­ Deductions in respect of certain income"

Section                                            Deduction

80-IA    Deductions in respect of profits and gains from undertakings or
         enterprises engaged in infrastructure development/ operation/
         maintenance, generation/ transmission/ distribution of power etc.

80-IAB Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an
             undertaking or enterprise engaged in development of SEZ

80-IAC Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an eligible
             start-up from an eligible business

80-IB    Deduction in respect of profits and gains from certain industrial
         undertakings other than infrastructure development
         undertakings

80-IBA Deduction in respect of profits and gains from housing
             projects/rental housing projects

80-IE    Deduction in respect of profits and gains from manufacture or
         production of eligible article or thing, substantial expansion to
         manufacture or produce any eligible article or thing or carrying
         on of eligible business in North-Eastern States

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        6.8  INCOME TAX LAW

 80JJA  Deduction in respect of profits and gains from business of
        collecting and processing of bio-degradable waste
80JJAA
 80LA   Deduction in respect of employment of new employees

 80M    Deduction in respect of certain income of Offshore Banking
  80P   Units and International Financial Services Centre
80QQB
        Deduction in respect of certain inter-corporate dividends
80RRB
        Deduction in respect of income of co-operative societies

        Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors of certain
        books other than text books

        Deduction in respect of royalty on patents

(ii) The effect of this provision is that, in case of failure to file return of income
       on or before the stipulated due date, the undertakings would lose the benefit
       of deduction under these sections.

Note: The deductions under section 80-IA to 80-IE, 80JJA, 80LA, 80M and 80P in respect
of certain incomes will be dealt with in detail at the Final Level.

ILLUSTRATION 1

Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax
Act, 1961:

(a) For grant of deduction under section 80JJAA, filing of audit report in prescribed
       form is must for a corporate assessee; filing of return within the due date laid
       down in section 139(1) is not required.

(b) Filing of belated return under section 139(4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 will
       debar an assessee from claiming deduction under section 80QQB if the assessee
       exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
       section 115BAC(1A) (i.e., he pays tax under the optional tax regime).

SOLUTION

(a) The statement is not correct. Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of
       return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1), as
       a pre-condition for availing the benefit of deduction, inter alia, under section
       80JJAA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                            6.9

(b) The statement is correct. As per section 80AC, the assessee has to furnish
       his return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1),
       to be eligible to claim deduction, inter alia, under section 80QQB.

Section 80B(5)

"Gross total income" means the total income computed in accordance with the
provisions of the Act without making any deduction under Chapter VI-A.
"Computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act" implies--

(i) that deductions under appropriate computation section have already been
       given effect to;

(ii) that income of other persons, if includible under sections 60 to 64, has been
       included;

(iii) the intra head and/or inter head losses have been adjusted; and

(iv) that unabsorbed brought forward business losses, unabsorbed depreciation
       etc., have been set-off.

Two types of deductions are allowable from Gross Total Income - Deductions under
Chapter VI-A and deduction under section 10AA which are discussed in this chapter.

                             Deductions from Gross Total Income

Deductions under Chapter VI-A                                                 6. Deduction
                                                                                   under

                                                                              section 10AA

2. Deductions in    3. Deductions in               4. Deductions    5. Other
respect of certain                                 in respect of  Deductions
                    respect  of                    other incomes
     payments
                    certain incomes

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.10  INCOME TAX LAW

    2. DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN
          PAYMENTS

2.1 Deduction in respect of investment in specified assets
      [Section 80C]

       [Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out
       of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Deduction in respect of investment/ contributions

       Section 80C provides for a deduction from the Gross Total Income of savings
       in specified modes of investments. The deduction under section 80C is
       available only to an individual or HUF exercising the option of shifting out of
       the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is not allowable
       under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.

       The maximum permissible deduction under section 80C is ` 1,50,000. The
       following are the investments/ contributions eligible for deduction ­

(1) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971

       Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of
       the individual for participation in the Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971. In case
       of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any member.

(2) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund

       Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of
       the individual for participation in any Unit linked Insurance Plan of the LIC
       Mutual Fund. In case of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any
       member.

(3) Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy

       Premium paid on insurance on the life of the individual, spouse or any child
       (minor or major) and in the case of HUF, any member thereof. This will include
       a life policy and an endowment policy.

       The following is a tabular summary of the deduction allowable under section
       80C vis-à-vis the date of issue of such policies ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                    6.11

                                                   Deduction u/s 80C

In respect of Premium paid to the extent of 20% of "actual capital
policies issued sum assured".
before 31.3.2012

In respect of       Premium paid to the extent of 10% of "actual capital
                    sum assured" i.e., minimum amount assured under the
policies issued on  policy on happening of the insured event at any time
                    during the term of the policy, not taking into account
or after 1.4.2012   ­

but       before    (i) the value of any premium agreed to be returned;
                        or
1.4.2013
                    (ii) any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over
                        and above the sum actually assured, which is to
                        be or may be received under the policy by any
                        person.

In respect of (a) Where the insurance is on the life of a

policies issued on  person with disability or severe disability as

or after 1.4.2013   referred to in section 80U or a person

                    suffering from disease or ailment as

                    specified under section 80DDB.

                    Premium paid to the extent of 15% of "actual
                    capital sum assured" [has the same meaning as
                    described above].

                    (b) Where the insurance is on the life of any
                           person, other than mentioned in (a) above

                    Premium paid to the extent of 10% of "actual
                    capital sum assured" [has the same meaning as
                    described above].

ILLUSTRATION 2

Compute the eligible deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2026-27 in respect of
life insurance premium paid by Mr. Ganesh during the P.Y.2025-26, the details
of which are given hereunder, if Mr. Ganesh has exercised the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.12                       INCOME TAX LAW

Date of                    Person insured                    Actual       Insurance
issue of
 policy                                                      capital sum premium paid

                                                             assured (`) during 2025-26

                                                                                       (`)

(i) 30/3/2012 Self                                           9,00,000                  48,000

(ii) 1/5/2019 Spouse                                         1,50,000                  20,000

(iii) 1/6/2022 Handicapped son                               4,00,000                  80,000
                        (section 80U disability)

SOLUTION

         Date of   Person                          Actual     Insurance   Deduction      Remark
         issue of  insured                         capital    premium     u/s 80C for  (restricted
          policy                                             paid during   A.Y.2026-
                                                     sum       2025-26                   to % of
(i) 30/3/2012                                      assured                      27         sum
(ii) 1/5/2019                                                      (`)
(iii) 1/6/2022                                        (`)                       (`)     assured)

      Total                                                                                 (`)

                   Self                            9,00,000  48,000       48,000               20%

                   Spouse                          1,50,000  20,000       15,000               10%

                   Handicapped 4,00,000                      80,000       60,000               15%

                   son (section

                   80U

                   disability)

                                                                          1,23,000

       ILLUSTRATION 3
       What would your answer if Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under
       section 115BAC?

       SOLUTION
       If Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, he
       would not be eligible for deduction under section 80C.
(4) Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity

Premium paid to effect and keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity on
the life of the individual and/or his or her spouse or any child, provided such

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.13

       contract does not contain any provision for the exercise by the insured of an
       option to receive cash payments in lieu of the payment of the annuity.

       It is pertinent to note here that a contract for a deferred annuity need not
       necessarily be with an insurance company. It follows therefore that such a
       contract can be entered into with any person.

(5) Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government employee
       for securing a deferred annuity

       Amount deducted by or on behalf of the Government from the salary of a
       Government employee in accordance with the conditions of his service for
       securing a deferred annuity or making provision for his spouse or children.
       The excess, if any, over one-fifth of the salary is to be ignored.

(6) Contribution to SPF/PPF/RPF

Contributions to any provident fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925
applies and recognized provident fund qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

Contribution made to any Provident Fund set up by the Central Government
and notified in his behalf (i.e., the Public Provident Fund established under
the Public Provident Fund Scheme, 1968) also qualifies for deduction under
section 80C. Such contribution can be made in the name of the individual, his
spouse and any child of the individual; and any member of the family, in case
of a HUF. The maximum limit for deposit in PPF is ` 1,50,000 in a year.

ILLUSTRATION 4

An individual assessee, resident in India, has made the following
deposit/payment during the previous year 2025-26:

                Particulars                                        `

Contribution to the public provident fund                          1,50,000

Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse (policy taken on  25,000
1.4.2019) (Assured value ` 2,20,000)

What is the deduction allowable under section 80C for A.Y.2026-27 if the
assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A)?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.14      INCOME TAX LAW

SOLUTION

Computation of deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2026-27

                                  Particulars                        `
                                                                1,50,000
Deposit in public provident fund
Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse                   22,000
(Maximum 10% of the assured value ` 2,20,000, as the policy is  1,72,000
taken after 31.3.2012)                                          1,50,000

Total

However, the maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C is
restricted to

(7) Contribution to approved superannuation Fund

Contribution by an employee to an approved superannuation fund qualifies
for deduction under section 80C.

(8) Any sum paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account

Subscription to any such security of the Central Government or any such
deposit scheme as the Central Government as may notify in the Official
Gazette. Accordingly, Sukanya Samriddhi Scheme has been notified to
provide that any sum paid or deposited during the previous year in the said
Scheme, by an individual in the name of ­

(a) any girl child of the individual; or

(b) any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian

would be eligible for deduction under section 80C.

Exemption on payment from Sukanya Samriddhi Account
[Section 10(11A)]

Section 10(11A) provides that any payment from an account opened in
accordance with the Sukanya Samriddhi Account Rules, 2014, made under the
Government Savings Bank Act, 1873, shall not be included in the total income
of the assessee. Accordingly, the interest accruing on deposits in, and
withdrawals from any account under the said scheme would be exempt.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.15

(9) Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII

       Subscription to any Savings Certificates under the Government Savings
       Certificates Act, 1959 notified by the Central Government in the Official
       Gazette (i.e. National Savings Certificate (VIII Issue) issued under the
       Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959).

(10) Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC

       Contributions to approved annuity plans of LIC (New Jeevan Dhara and New
       Jeevan Akshay, New Jeevan Dhara I and New Jeevan Akshay I, II and III) or any
       other insurer as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
       Gazette, specify in this behalf.

(11) Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI

       Subscription to any units of any mutual fund or from the Administrator or the
       specified company under any plan formulated in accordance with such
       scheme notified by the Central Government;

(12) Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI

       Contribution by an individual to a pension fund set up by any Mutual Fund
       or by the Administrator or the specified company as the Central Government
       may specify (i.e., UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund set up by the specified
       company referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of
       Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 as a pension fund).

(13) Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit
       Scheme, 2008

       Subscription to any deposit scheme or contribution to any pension fund set
       up by the National Housing Bank i.e., National Housing Bank (Tax Saving)
       Term Deposit Scheme, 2008.

(14) Subscription to notified deposit scheme

       Subscription to any such deposit scheme of

       · a public sector company which is engaged in providing long-term
               finance for construction, or purchase of houses in India for residential
               purposes; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.16  INCOME TAX LAW

       · any such deposit scheme of any authority constituted in India by or
               under any law enacted either for the purpose of dealing with and
               satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the purpose of
               planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages or
               for both.

       The deposit scheme should be notified by the Central Government, for
       example, public deposit scheme of HUDCO.

(15) Payment of tuition fees to any university, college, school or other
       educational institution within India for full-time education for
       maximum 2 children

       Payment of tuition fees by an individual assessee at the time of admission or
       thereafter to any university, college, school or other educational
       institutions within India for the purpose of full-time education of any two
       children of the individual. This benefit is only for the amount of tuition fees
       for full-time education and shall not include any payment towards
       development fees or donation or payment of similar nature and payment
       made for education to any institution situated outside India.

(16) Repayment of housing loan including stamp duty, registration fee and
       other expenses

       Any payment made towards the cost of purchase or construction of a new
       residential house property. The income from such property ­

       (i) should be chargeable to tax under the head "Income from house
               property";

       (ii) would have been chargeable to tax under the head "Income from house
               property" had it not been used for the assessee's own residence.

       The approved types of payments are as follows:

       (a) Any instalment or part payment of the amount due under any self-
               financing or other schemes of any development authority, Housing
               Board or other authority engaged in the construction and sale of house
               property on ownership basis; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.17

(b) Any instalment or part payment of the amount due to any company or
       a cooperative society of which the assessee is a shareholder or member
       towards the cost of house allotted to him; or

(c) Repayment of amount borrowed by the assessee from:

       I The Central Government or any State Government;

       II Any bank including a co-operative bank;

       III The Life Insurance Corporation;

       IV The National Housing Bank;

       V Any public company formed and registered in India with the main
               object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance
               for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential
               purposes which is eligible for deduction under section 36(1)(viii);

       VI Any company in which the public are substantially interested or
               any cooperative society engaged in the business of financing the
               construction of houses;

       VII The assessee's employer, where such employer is an authority or
               a board or a corporation or any other body established or
               constituted under a Central or State Act;

       VIII the assessee's employer where such employer is a public company
               or public sector company or a university established by law or a
               college affiliated to such university or a local authority or a co-
               operative society.

(d) Stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses for the purposes of
       transfer of such house property to the assessee.

Inadmissible payments: However, the following amounts do not qualify for
rebate:

(A) admission fee, cost of share and initial deposit which a shareholder of
       a company or a member of a co-operative society has to pay for
       becoming a shareholder or member; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.18  INCOME TAX LAW

       (B) the cost of any addition or alteration or renovation or repair of the
               house property after the issue of the completion certificate in respect
               of the house property or after the house has been occupied by the
               assessee or any person on his behalf or after it has been let out; or

       (C) any expenditure in respect of which deduction is allowable under
               section 24.

(17) Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures

       Subscription to equity shares or debentures forming part of any eligible issue
       of capital approved by the Board on an application made by a public company
       or as subscription to any eligible issue of capital by any public financial
       institution in the prescribed form.

       A lock-in period of three years is provided in respect of such equity shares or
       debentures. In case of any sale or transfer of shares or debentures within
       three years of the date of acquisition, the aggregate amount of deductions
       allowed in respect of such equity shares or debentures in the previous year
       or years preceding the previous year in which such sale or transfer has taken
       place shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of such previous year
       and shall be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous
       year.

       A person shall be treated as having acquired any shares or debentures on the
       date on which his name is entered in relation to those shares or debentures
       in the register of members or of debenture-holders, as the case may be, of
       the public company.

(18) Subscription to certain units of mutual fund

       Subscription to any units of any mutual fund and approved by the Board on
       an application made by such mutual fund in the prescribed form.

       It is necessary that such units should be subscribed only in the eligible issue
       of capital of any company.

(19) Investment in five year term deposit

       Investment in term deposit

       (i) for a period of not less than five years with a scheduled bank; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.19

       (ii) which is in accordance with a scheme framed and notified by the Central
               Government in the Official Gazette

       qualifies as an eligible investment for availing deduction under section 80C.

       The maximum limit for investment in term deposit is ` 1,50,000.

       Scheduled bank means -

       (1) the State Bank of India (SBI)

       (2) a subsidiary bank of SBI, or

       (3) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking
               Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act

       (4) any other bank, being a bank included in the Second Schedule to the
               Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934.

(20) Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD

       Subscription to such bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government
       may notify in the Official Gazette) qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

(21) Investment in five year Post Office time deposit

       Investment in five year time deposit in an account under Post Office Time
       Deposit Rules, 1981 qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

(22) Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004

       Deposit in an account under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004
       qualifies for deduction under section 80C.

(23) Contribution to additional account under NPS

       Contribution by a Central Government employee to additional account under
       NPS (specified account) referred to in section 80CCD for a fixed period of not
       less than 3 years and which is in accordance with the scheme notified by the
       Central Government for this purpose qualifies for deduction under section
       80C. It may be noted that only the contribution to the additional account
       under NPS will qualify for deduction under section 80C.

       There are two types of NPS account i.e., Tier I and Tier II, to which an individual
       can contribute. Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution
       to individual pension account [Tier I account] under the NPS [referred to in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.20  INCOME TAX LAW

       section 20(2)(a) of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
       Act, 2013 (PFRDA)] whereas deduction under section 80C is allowable in
       respect of contribution by Central Government employee to additional
       account [Tier II account] of NPS [referred to in section 20(3) of the PFRDA],
       which does not qualify for deduction under section 80CCD. Thus, Tier II
       account is the additional account under NPS, contribution to which
       would qualify for deduction under section 80C only in the hands of a
       Central Government employee.

(ii) Termination of Insurance Policy or Unit Linked Insurance Plan or transfer
       of House Property or withdrawal of deposit:

       Where, in any previous year, an assessee:

       (i) terminates his contract of insurance referred to in (3) above, by notice
               to that effect or where the contract ceases to be in force by reason of
               not paying the premium, by not reviving the contract of insurance, -

               (a) in case of any single premium policy, within two years after the
                       date of commencement of insurance; or

               (b) in any other case, before premiums have been paid for two years;
                       or

       (ii) terminates his participation in any Unit Linked Insurance Plan referred
               to in (1) or (2) above, by notice to that effect or where he ceases to
               participate by reason of failure to pay any contribution, by not reviving
               his participation, before contributions in respect of such participation
               have been paid for five years, or

       (iii) transfers the house property referred to in (16) above, before the expiry
               of five years from the end of the financial year in which possession of
               such property is obtained by him, or receives back, whether by way of
               refund or otherwise, any sum specified in (16) above,

       then, no deduction will be allowed to the assessee in respect of sums paid
       during such previous year and the total amount of deductions of income
       allowed in respect of the previous year or years preceding such previous year,
       shall be deemed to be income of the assessee of such previous year and shall
       be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.21

Further, where any amount is withdrawn by the assessee from his account
under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme or under the Post Office Time
Deposit Rules before the expiry of a period of 5 years from the date of its
deposit, the amount so withdrawn shall be deemed to be the income of the
assessee of the previous year in which the amount is withdrawn. Accordingly,
the amount so withdrawn would be chargeable to tax in the assessment year
relevant to such previous year. The amount chargeable to tax would also
include that part of the amount withdrawn which represents interest accrued
on the deposit.

However, if any part of the amount relating to interest so received or
withdrawn has been subject to tax in any of the earlier years, such amount
shall not be taxed again.

If any amount has been received by the nominee or legal heir of the assessee,
on the death of such assessee, the amount would not be chargeable to tax.
However, if the amount relating to interest on deposit was not included in the
total income of the assessee in any of any earlier years, then, such interest would
be chargeable to tax.

Summary of investment/ contributions eligible for deduction u/s 80C

S.   Investment/ contributions

No.

(i) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971
       In case of individual ­ in the name of individual, his or her spouse or
       any child of the individual
       In case of HUF ­ in the name of any member of HUF

(ii) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund
        In case of individual ­ In the name of individual, his or her spouse or
        any child of the individual

        In case of HUF ­ In the name of any member of HUF

(iii) Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy
        In case of individual ­ on the life of individual, his or her spouse or
        any child of the individual
        In case of HUF ­ on the life of any member of HUF

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.22  INCOME TAX LAW

 (iv) Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity
         In case of individual ­ on the life of individual, his or her spouse or
         any child of the individual

 (v) Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government
         employee for securing a deferred annuity [excess over 1/5th of the
         salary to be ignored]

 (vi) Contribution to PPF
         In case of individual ­ in the name of Individual, his or her spouse or
         any child of the individual
         In case of HUF ­ In the name of any member of HUF

(vii) Contribution to SPF/RPF

(viii) Contribution to approved superannuation Fund

 (ix) Paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account
         (a) for any girl child of the individual; or
         (b) for any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian

 (x) Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII

 (xi) Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC or any other notified
         insurer

(xii) Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI [ELSS]

(xiii) Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI

(xiv) Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit
         Scheme, 2008

(xv) Subscription to notified deposit scheme of public sector co. or
         authority constituted in India in relation to housing. For example,
         public deposit scheme of HUDCO.

(xvi) Tuition fees to by an individual to any university, college, school or
         other educational institution within India for full-time education for
         maximum 2 children of the individual.

(xvii) Repayment of housing loan for purchase/ construction of house
         property including stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses
         for transfer

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.23

(xviii) Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures forming part of
          any approved eligible issue of capital by a public company or by any
          public financial institution

(xix) Units of mutual fund subscribed only in eligible issue of capital of any
          company

 (xx) Investment in five year term deposit with a scheduled bank

(xxi) Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD

(xxii) Investment in five year Post Office time deposit

(xxiii) Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004

(xxiv) Contribution to additional account under NPS (Tier II account), in case
          of Central Government employee

2.2 Deduction in respect of contribution to certain pension
      funds [Section 80CCC]

      [Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of

       the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: Where an assessee, being an individual, has in the previous
       year paid or deposited any amount out of his income chargeable to tax to effect
       or keep in force a contract for any annuity plan of LIC of India or any other
       insurer for receiving pension from the fund set up by LIC or such other insurer,
       he shall be allowed a deduction in the computation of his total income.

       For this purpose, the interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee's
       account shall not be reckoned as contribution.

       Note: Where any amount paid or deposited by the assessee has been taken
       into account for the purposes of this section, a deduction under section 80C
       shall not be allowed with reference to such amount.

(ii) Maximum Deduction: The maximum permissible deduction is ` 1,50,000
       (Further, the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 prescribed in section 80CCE will
       continue to be applicable i.e. the maximum permissible deduction under
       sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together is ` 1,50,000).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.24  INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) Deemed Income: Where any amount standing to the credit of the assessee
       in the fund in respect of which a deduction has been allowed, together with
       interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee's account is received by
       the assessee or his nominee on account of the surrender of the annuity plan
       in any previous year or as pension received from the annuity plan, such
       amount will be deemed to be the income of the assessee or the nominee in
       that previous year in which such withdrawal is made or pension is received. It
       will be chargeable to tax as income of that previous year.

2.3 Deduction in respect of contribution to pension scheme
      notified by the Central Government [Section 80CCD]

(i) Pension Scheme of Central Government: It is mandatory for persons
       entering the service of the Central Government on or after 1st January, 2004,
       to contribute 10% of their salary every month towards their pension account.
       A matching contribution is required to be made by the Government to the
       said account. The benefit of this scheme is also available to individuals
       employed by any other employer as well as to self-employed individuals.

(ii) Deduction: Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution
       made to the pension scheme notified by the Central Government.

       Accordingly, the Central Government has notified the `Atal Pension Yojana
       (APY)' as a pension scheme, contribution to which would qualify for deduction
       under section 80CCD in the hands of the individual.

(iii) Quantum of deduction:

       (a) Section 80CCD(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or
               deposited by an employee in his pension account subject to a maximum
               of 10% of his salary. The deduction in the case of a self-employed
               individual would be restricted to 20% of his gross total income in the
               previous year.

                                 Deduction u/s 80CCD(1) would be available to an assessee
                                 only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default
                                 tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., if he pays tax under the
                 optional tax regime ­ the normal provisions of the Act).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                             6.25

          Deduction under section 80CCD(1)

            An individual                                      10% of
          employed by CG                                       salary

              on or after
             01.01.2004

Eligible    An Individual
Assessee  employed by any
           other employer

                                                   Any other   20% of GTI
                                                   individual

(b) Section 80CCD(1B) provides for an additional deduction of upto
       ` 50,000 in respect of the whole of the amount paid or deposited by an
       individual assessee under NPS in the previous year, whether or not any
       deduction is allowed u/s 80CCD(1).

                           Deduction u/s 80CCD(1B) would be available to an
                        assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the
                        default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., it is
       available only if the assessee pays tax under the optional tax regime ­
       normal provisions of the Act)

(c) Whereas the deduction under section 80CCD(1) is subject to the overall
       limit of ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE (i.e., the maximum permissible
       deduction under sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together), the
       deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) is in addition to
       the overall limit of ` 1.50 lakh provided under section 80CCE.

(d) Under section 80CCD(2), contribution made by the Central Government
       or State Government or any other employer in the previous year to the
       said account of an employee, is allowed as a deduction in computation
       of the total income of the assessee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.26  INCOME TAX LAW

       (e) The entire employer's contribution would be included in the salary of
               the employee. However, deduction under section 80CCD(2) would be
               restricted to,

                - In case of contribution made by the Central Government or State
                  Government - 14% of salary and

                - In case of contribution made by any other employer ­ 10% of salary
                 (14% of salary in case assessee is paying tax as per default tax regime
                 under section 115BAC).

                               Deduction u/s 80CCD(2) would be available to an assessee
                               irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

                             1. The limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE does not apply
                 to employer's contribution to pension scheme of Central Government
                 which is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2).

                 2. No deduction will be allowed under section 80C in respect of
                 amounts paid or deposited by the assessee, for which deduction has
                 been allowed under section 80CCD(1) or under section 80CCD(1B).

(iv) Deduction for contribution made to NPS Vatsalya Scheme: NPS Vatsalya
       is a NPS Scheme designed for minor Indian citizen upto the age of 18 years.
       The account will be opened and operated by the guardian on behalf of the
       minor. When the minor attains the age of 18 years, the account will continue
       to be operational and will be shifted into a NPS Tier-I Account.

       Deduction under section 80CCD(1B) is allowed for any amount paid or
       deposited in the account of minor under the pension scheme by the assessee,
       being the parent or guardian of such minor. However, the aggregate amount
       of deduction under section 80CCD(1B) shall not exceed ` 50,000.

(v) Deemed Income: The amount standing to the credit of the assessee or a
       minor, in his or a minor's pension account (for which deduction has already
       been claimed by him under this section) and accretions to such account, shall
       be taxed as income in the year in which such amounts are received by the
       assessee or his nominee on -

       (a) closure of the account or

       (b) his opting out of the said scheme or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.27

(c) receipt of pension from the annuity plan purchased or taken on such closure
       or opting out.

However, the amount received by the nominee on the death of the assessee
under the circumstances referred to in (a) and (b) above, shall not be deemed
to be the income of the nominee.

It is further provided that the amount received by a person, being the parent or
guardian or nominee of a minor, shall not be deemed to be the income of such
person if such amount is received on account of closure of pension scheme due
to the death of minor.

The assessee shall be deemed not to have received any amount in the
previous year if such amount is used for purchasing an annuity plan in the
same previous year.

  1. Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an assessee on closure
          of his account or on his opting out of the pension scheme
          [Section 10(12A)]

          (i) As per section 80CCD, any payment from National Pension
                  System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or his opting
                  out of the pension scheme is chargeable to tax.

          (ii) Section 10(12A) provides that any payment from National
                  Pension System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or
                  his opting out of the pension scheme referred to in section
                  80CCD, to the extent it does not exceed 60% of the total
                  amount payable to him at the time of closure or his opting out
                  of the scheme, shall be exempt from tax.

  2. Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an employee on partial
          withdrawal [Section 10(12B)]

          To provide relief to an employee subscriber of NPS, section 10(12B)
          provides that any payment from National Pension System Trust to
          an employee under the pension scheme referred to in section
          80CCD, on partial withdrawn made out of his account in accordance
          with the terms and conditions specified under the Pension Fund
          Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 and the
          regulations made there under, shall be exempt from tax to the extent
          it does not exceed 25% of amount of contributions made by him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           6.28  INCOME TAX LAW

3. Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an assessee, being the
       parent or guardian of minor on partial withdrawal [Section
       10(12BA)]

       Section 10(12BA) provides that any payment from National Pension
       System Trust to an assessee, being the parent or guardian of
       minor under the pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, on
       partial withdrawn made out of minor's account in accordance with the
       terms and conditions specified under the Pension Fund Regulatory and
       Development Authority Act, 2013 and the regulations made there
       under, shall be exempt from tax to the extent it does not exceed 25%
       of amount of contributions made by him.

2.4 Limit on deductions under sections 80C, 80CCC &
      80CCD(1) [Section 80CCE]

This section restricts the aggregate amount of deduction under section 80C, 80CCC
and 80CCD(1) to ` 1,50,000. It may be noted that the deduction of upto
` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) and employer's contribution to pension scheme,
allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2) in the hands of the employee,
would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 stipulated under section 80CCE.

The following table summarizes the ceiling limit under these sections ­

 Section                          Particulars              Ceiling limit (`)
   80C     Investment in LIP, Deposit in PPF/SPF/RPF etc.              1,50,000
           Contribution to certain pension funds                       1,50,000
 80CCC     Contribution to NPS of Government
80CCD(1)                                                    10% of salary or
                                                              20% of GTI, as
  80CCE    Aggregate deduction under sections 80C,
80CCD(1B)  80CCC & 80CCD(1)                                the case may be.
                                                                       1,50,000
80CCD(2)   Contribution to NPS notified by the Central
           Government (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000                   50,000
           under section 80CCE)
                                                                14% of salary
           Contribution by the Central Government or
           State Government to NPS A/c of its
           employees (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000
           under section 80CCE)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.29

Contribution by any other employer to NPS          10% of salary
A/c of its employees (outside the limit of         14% of salary
` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE)

- Where assessee is paying tax as per
   optional tax regime

- where assessee is paying tax as per default
   tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A)

For computation of limit under section 80CCD(1) and 80CCD(2), salary
includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide, but
excludes all other allowances and perquisites.

ILLUSTRATION 5

The basic salary of Mr. A is ` 1,00,000 p.m. He is entitled to dearness allowance, which
is 40% of basic salary. 50% of dearness allowance forms part of pay for retirement
benefits. Both Mr. A and his employer, ABC Ltd., contribute 15% of basic salary to
the pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD. Explain the tax treatment in respect
of such contribution in the hands of Mr. A if he has exercised the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

What would be your answer if Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC?

SOLUTION

(i) Tax treatment in the hands of Mr. A in respect of employer's and own
       contribution to pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, where
       Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
       provided under section 115BAC(1A) [i.e., where Mr. A pays tax under the
       normal provisions of the Act]

       (a) Employer's contribution to such pension scheme would be treated as
               salary since it is specifically included in the definition of "salary" under
               section 17(1)(viii). Therefore, ` 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of
               ` 12,00,000, will be included in Mr. A's salary.

       (b) Mr. A's contribution to pension scheme is allowable as deduction under
               section 80CCD(1). However, the deduction is restricted to 10% of salary.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.30  INCOME TAX LAW

Salary, for this purpose, means basic pay plus dearness allowance, if it
forms part of pay.

Therefore, "salary" for the purpose of deduction under section 80CCD
for Mr. A would be ­

                              Particulars                       `
                                                           12,00,000
Basic salary = ` 1,00,000 × 12 =
                                                            2,40,000
Dearness allowance = 40% of ` 12,00,000 = ` 4,80,000       14,40,000

50% of Dearness Allowance forms part of pay = 50% of        1,44,000
` 4,80,000
                                                               36,000
Salary for the purpose of deduction under section
80CCD

Deduction under section 80CCD(1) is restricted to 10%
of ` 14,40,000 (as against actual contribution of
` 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of ` 12,00,000)

As per section 80CCD(1B), a further deduction of upto
` 50,000 is allowable. Therefore, deduction under section
80CCD(1B) is ` 36,000 (` 1,80,000 - ` 1,44,000).

` 1,44,000 is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(1). This would
be taken into consideration and be subject to the overall limit of
` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE. ` 36,000 allowable as deduction under
section 80CCD(1B) is outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 under
section 80CCE.

       In the alternative, ` 50,000 can be claimed as deduction under section
       80CCD(1B). The balance ` 1,30,000 (` 1,80,000- ` 50,000) can be claimed
       as deduction under section 80CCD(1).

(c) Employer's contribution to pension scheme would be allowable as
       deduction under section 80CCD(2), subject to a maximum of 10% of
       salary. Therefore, deduction under section 80CCD(2), would also be
       restricted to ` 1,44,000, even though the entire employer's contribution
       of ` 1,80,000 is included in salary under section 17(1)(viii). However, this
       deduction of employer's contribution of ` 1,44,000 to pension scheme
       would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE i.e.,
       this deduction would be over and above the other deductions which
       are subject to the limit of ` 1,50,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.31

(ii) Where Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC

Mr. A would not be eligible for deduction under section 80CCD(1)/(1B) in respect
of his contribution to pension scheme under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC. However, he would be allowed deduction of upto ` 2,01,600,
being 14% of salary [` 14,40,000, computed in (i) above] under section 80CCD(2)
in respect of employer's contribution to pension scheme. Accordingly, entire
employer's contributions of ` 1,80,000 would be allowed as deduction under
section 80CCD(2).

ILLUSTRATION 6
The gross total income of Mr. X for the A.Y.2026-27 is ` 8,00,000. He has made the
following investments/payments during the F.Y.2025-26 ­

                         Particulars                         `

(1) Contribution to PPF                                      1,10,000

(2) Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for 45,000
      education of his son studying in Class XI

(3) Repayment of housing loan taken from Standard Chartered Bank 25,000

(4) Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC             1,05,000

Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2026-27 if Mr. X
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION
       Computation of deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2026-27

                         Particulars                         `

Deduction under section 80C

- Contribution to PPF                                        1,10,000

- Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for  45,000
     education of his son studying in Class XI

- Repayment of housing loan                                  25,000

                                                             1,80,000

Restricted to ` 1,50,000, being the maximum permissible deduction 1,50,000
u/s 80C

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.32  INCOME TAX LAW

Deduction under section 80CCC

- Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC                    1,05,000

                                                                  2,55,000

As per section 80CCE, the aggregate deduction under section 80C,
80CCC and 80CCD(1) has to be restricted to ` 1,50,000

Deduction allowable under Chapter VIA for the A.Y. 2026-27 1,50,000

2.5 Deduction in respect of contribution to Agnipath Scheme
      [Section 80CCH]

(i) Meaning of Agnipath scheme: Agnipath scheme is a Central Government
       scheme launched in 2022 for enrolment of Indian youth in the Indian Armed
       Forces.

(ii) Meaning of Agniveer Corpus Fund: The Agniveer Corpus Fund means a
       fund in which consolidated contributions of all the Agniveers and matching
       contributions of the Central Government along with interest on both these
       contributions are held.

(iii) Features of the Agnipath Scheme: Each Agniveer is to contribute 30% of his
       monthly customized Agniveer Package to the individual's Agniveer Corpus
       Fund. Further, the Government will also contribute a matching amount to the
       `Agniveer Corpus Fund'. The Government will also pay to the subscriber
       interest as approved from time to time on the contributions standing in his
       account.

(iv) Deduction: Section 80CCH provides deduction in respect of contribution
       made in the Agniveer Corpus Fund by the individual enrolled in the Agnipath
       Scheme and the Central Government.

(v) Quantum of deduction:

       (a) Section 80CCH(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or
               deposited by an assessee, being an individual enrolled in the Agnipath
               Scheme and subscribing to the Agniveer Corpus Fund on or after
               1.11.2022, in his account in the Agniveer Corpus Fund.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.33

                         Deduction u/s 80CCH(1) would be available to an
                         individual only if he has exercised the option of shifting out
                         of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A).

(b) Under section 80CCH(2), the whole amount of contribution made by
       the Central Government to the said account of an assessee in the
       Agniveer Corpus Fund, is allowed as a deduction in computation of the
       total income of the assessee.

(e) The entire Central Government's contribution to the Agniveer Corpus
       Fund would be included in the salary of the assessee. However,
       deduction under section 80CCH(2) would be available for the same.

                        Deduction u/s 80CCH(2) would be available to an individual
                        irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.

Exemption on payment from Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under
the Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee [Section 10(12C)]

Any payment from the Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under the
Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee would be exempt from tax.

2.6 Deduction in respect of medical insurance premium
      [Section 80D]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

1. In case of an Individual

(i) Deduction in respect of insurance premium paid for family: A deduction
       to the extent of ` 25,000 is allowed in respect of the following payments ­

       (1) premium paid to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health
               of self, spouse and dependent children or

       (2) any contribution made to the Central Government Health Scheme or

       (3) such other health scheme as may be notified by the Central
               Government. Contributory Health Service Scheme of the Department of
               Space has been notified by the Central Government.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.34  INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Deduction in respect of insurance premium for parents: A further
       deduction up to ` 25,000 is allowable to effect or to keep in force an insurance
       on the health of parents of the assessee.

                         Quantum of deduction in case of senior citizen: An increased
                       deduction of ` 50,000 (instead of ` 25,000) shall be allowed in
                         case any of the persons mentioned above is a senior citizen i.e.,
         an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any time
         during the relevant previous year.

(iii) Deduction in respect of payment towards preventive health check-up:
       Section 80D provides that deduction to the extent of ` 5,000 shall be allowed
       in respect payment made on account of preventive health check-up of self,
       spouse, dependent children or parents during the previous year. However,
       the said deduction of ` 5,000 is within the overall limit of ` 25,000 or ` 50,000,
       specified in (i) and (ii) above.

(iv) Mode of payment: For claiming deduction under section 80D, the payment
       can be made:

       (1) by any mode, including cash, in respect of any sum paid on account of
               preventive health check-up;

       (2) by any mode other than cash, in all other cases.

(v) Deduction for medical expenditure incurred on senior citizens: As a
       welfare measure towards senior citizens i.e., person of the age of 60 years
       or more and resident in India, who are unable to get health insurance
       coverage, deduction of upto ` 50,000 would be allowed in respect of any
       payment made on account of medical expenditure in respect of a such
       person(s), if no payment has been made to keep in force an insurance on the
       health of such person(s).

2. In case of a HUF

       Deduction under section 80D is allowable in respect of premium paid to
       insure the health of any member of the family. The maximum deduction
       available to a HUF would be ` 25,000 and in case any member is a senior
       citizen, ` 50,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                           6.35

       Further, the amount paid on account of medical expenditure incurred on the
       health of any member(s) of a family who is a resident senior citizen would qualify
       for deduction subject to a maximum of ` 50,000 provided no amount has been
       paid to effect or keep in force any insurance on the health of such person(s).

3. Other conditions

       The other conditions to be fulfilled are that such premium should be paid by
       any mode, other than cash, in the previous year out of his income chargeable
       to tax. Further, the medical insurance should be in accordance with a scheme
       made in this behalf by -

       (a) the General Insurance Corporation of India and approved by the Central
               Government in this behalf; or

       (b) any other insurer and approved by the Insurance Regulatory and
               Development Authority.

       The following table summarizes the provisions of section 80D ­

S. Nature of payment/                              Expenditure on behalf of Deduction

No.  expenditure

I (i) Any premium paid,
     otherwise than by In case of Self, spouse and
     way of cash, to keep individual dependent                                        ` 25,000
                                                   children                           ` 50,000
     in force an insurance

     on the health                                 In case of Family member

     (ii) Contribution  to HUF

     Central Government

     Health      Scheme                            In case any of the above
     (CGHS)
                                                   persons is of the age of 60 years

     (iii) Preventive health or more + resident in India

     check up expenditure

II (i) Any premium paid,                           Parents                            ` 25,000
                                                                                      ` 50,000
     otherwise than by way

     of cash, to keep in

     force an insurance on In case either or both the
     the health
                                                   parents is of the age of 60 years

     (ii) Preventive health or more + Resident in India

     check up

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.36         INCOME TAX LAW

   Maximum ` 5,000 allowed as deduction for aggregate of
     preventive health check-up expenditure, by any mode

including cash, mentioned in I and II (Subject to overall limit of
                                  ` 25,000 or

III Amount paid on For self/spouse/parents + who

account of medical is of the age of 60 years or more                              ` 50,000

expenditure                                        + Resident in India + no

                                                   payment has been made to

                                                   keep in force an insurance on

                                                   the health of such person

       Note: In case the individual or any of his family members is a senior citizen,
       the aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of premium, contribution
       to CGHS and medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (I) & (III) above,
       cannot exceed ` 50,000.

       In case one of the parents is a senior citizen who is covered under mediclaim
       policy and another is also a senior citizen but not covered under mediclaim
       policy, the aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of medical
       insurance premium and medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (II) &
        (III) above, cannot exceed ` 50,000.

4. Deduction where premium for health insurance is paid in lump sum
       [Section 80D(4A)]

       (i) Appropriate fraction of lump sum premium allowable as deduction:
               In a case where mediclaim premium is paid in lumpsum for more than
               one year by:

               (a) an individual, to effect or keep in force an insurance on his health
                       or health of his spouse, dependent children or parents; or

               (b) a HUF, to effect or keep in force an insurance on the health of any
                       member of the family,

               then, the deduction allowable under this section for each of the relevant
               previous year would be equal to the appropriate fraction of such lump
               sum payment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                            6.37

(ii) Meaning of certain terms

                Term                                  Meaning
                           1 ÷ Total number of relevant previous years
          Appropriate
          fraction         The previous year in which such lump sum amount
                           is paid; and the subsequent previous year(s)
          Relevant         during which the insurance would be in force.
          previous year

ILLUSTRATION 7

Mr. A, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 20,000 during the
P.Y. 2025-26 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse. He also paid
medical insurance premium of ` 47,000 during the year to insure the health of his
father, aged 63 years, who is not dependent on him. He contributed ` 3,600 to Central
Government Health Scheme during the year. He has incurred ` 3,000 in cash on
preventive health check-up of himself and his spouse and ` 4,000 by cheque on
preventive health check-up of his father. Compute the deduction allowable under
section 80D for the A.Y. 2026-27 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2026-27

                Particulars                                Actual Maximum

                                                           Payment deduction

                                                           `       allowable `

A. Premium paid and medical expenditure
      incurred for self and spouse

(i) Medical insurance premium paid for self and            20,000   20,000
      spouse

(ii) Contribution to CGHS                                  3,600    3,600

(iii) Exp. on preventive health check-up of self & spouse  3,000    1,400

                                                           26,600   25,000

B. Premium paid or medical expenditure incurred
      for father, who is a senior citizen

(i) Mediclaim premium paid for father, who is over         47,000   47,000
      60 years of age

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.38  INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Expenditure on preventive health check-up of          4,000    3,000
      father                                             51,000
                                                                  50,000
      Total deduction under section 80D (` 25,000 +               75,000
      ` 50,000)

Notes:

(1) The total deduction under A. (i), (ii) and (iii) above should not exceed ` 25,000.
       Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for self and spouse
       would be restricted to ` 1,400, being (` 25,000 ­ ` 20,000 ­ ` 3,600).

(2) The total deduction under B. (i) and (ii) above should not exceed ` 50,000.
       Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for father would be
       restricted to ` 3,000, being (` 50,000 ­ ` 47,000).

(3) In this case, the total deduction allowed on account of expenditure on
       preventive health check-up of self, spouse and father is ` 4,400 (i.e., ` 1,400
       + ` 3,000), which is within the maximum permissible limit of ` 5,000.

ILLUSTRATION 8

Mr. Y, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 22,000 during the
P.Y. 2025-26 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse and dependent
children. He also paid medical insurance premium of ` 33,000 during the year to insure
the health of his mother, aged 67 years, who is not dependent on him. He incurred
medical expenditure of ` 20,000 on his father, aged 71 years, who is not covered under
mediclaim policy. His father is also not dependent upon him. He contributed ` 6,000 to
Central Government Health Scheme during the year. Compute the deduction allowable
under section 80D for the A.Y. 2026-27 if Mr. Y has exercised the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

             Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2026-27

      Particulars                                        `        `

(i) Medical insurance premium paid for self, spouse and  22,000
       dependent children

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                         6.39

(ii) Contribution to CGHS                                   6,000
                                                           28,000
       restricted to
(iii) Mediclaim premium paid for mother, who is over 60            25,000

       years of age                                        33,000
(iv) Medical expenditure incurred for father, who is over
                                                           20,000
       60 years of age and not covered by any insurance
                                                           53,000
       restricted to
                                                                   50,000
                                                                   75,000

2.7 Deduction in respect of maintenance including medical
      treatment of a dependant disabled [Section 80DD]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: Section 80DD provides deduction to an assessee, who is a
       resident in India, being an individual or Hindu undivided family.

(ii) Payments qualifying for deduction:

       (a) Any amount ­

               - incurred for the medical treatment (including nursing), training
                       and rehabilitation of a dependant, being a person with disability,
                       or

               - paid or deposited under a scheme framed in this behalf by the
                       Life Insurance Corporation or any other insurer or the
                       Administrator or the Specified Company2 for the maintenance of
                       a dependant, being a person with disability

               qualifies for deduction.

2 as referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal)
Act, 2002,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.40  INCOME TAX LAW

       (b) The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to assessees
               incurring expenditure on maintenance including medical treatment of
               persons suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities.

(iii) Quantum of deduction: The quantum of deduction is ` 75,000 and in case
       of severe disability (i.e., person with 80% or more disability) the deduction
       shall be ` 1,25,000.

(iv) Conditions:

       (a) The scheme should provide for payment of annuity or a lump sum
               amount for the benefit of a dependant, being a person with disability,

               I in the event of the death of the individual or member of the HUF,
                       in whose name subscription was made; or

               II on attaining the age of 60 years or more by such individual or the
                       member of the HUF, and the payment or deposit to such scheme
                       has been discontinued

               and the assessee must nominate either the dependant, being a person
               with disability or any other person or a trust to receive the payment on
               his behalf, for the benefit of the dependant, being a person with
               disability.

       (b) For claiming the deduction, the assessee have to furnish a copy of the
               certificate issued by the medical authority under the Persons with
               Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
               Participation) Act, 1995 along with the return of income under
               section 139.

       (c) Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh
               certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after
               the expiry of the period mentioned in the original certificate in order to
               continue to claim the deduction.

(v) Deemed income:

       If the dependent, being a person with disability, predeceases the individual
       or the member of HUF, in whose name subscription was made, then, the
       amount paid or deposited under the said scheme would be the deemed
       income and chargeable to tax in the hands of the assessee (individual or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                            6.41

member of HUF) in the previous year in which such amount is received by
him.

However, such deeming provisions would not apply, to the amount received
by the dependent, being a person with disability, before his death, by way of
annuity or lump sum under the scheme mentioned in II of (a) above i.e., when
the individual or member of HUF attains the age of 60 years or more, and the
payment or deposit to such scheme has been discontinued.

(vi) Meaning of "Dependent":

Assessee                                           Dependant

(1) Individual the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the
                         individual who is wholly or mainly dependant on such
                         individual and not claimed deduction under section 80U in
                         the computation of his income

(2) HUF   a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on
          such HUF and not claimed deduction under section 80U
          in the computation of his income

ILLUSTRATION 9

Mr. X is a resident individual. He deposits a sum of ` 50,000 with Life Insurance
Corporation every year for the maintenance of his disabled grandfather who is wholly
dependent upon him. The disability is one which comes under the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1995. A copy of the certificate from the medical authority is submitted. Compute the
amount of deduction available under section 80DD for the A.Y. 2026-27, if Mr. X has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION
Since the amount deposited by Mr. X was for his grandfather, he will not be allowed
any deduction under section 80DD. The deduction is available if the individual
assessee incurs any expense for a "dependant" disabled person. Grandfather does
not come within the meaning of "dependant" as defined under section 80DD.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.42      INCOME TAX LAW

ILLUSTRATION 10
What will be the deduction if Mr. X had made this deposit for his dependant father?

SOLUTION
Since the expense was incurred for a dependant disabled person, Mr. X will be
entitled to claim a deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD, irrespective of the
amount deposited. In case his father has severe disability, the deduction would be
` 1,25,000.

2.8 Deduction in respect of medical treatment etc.
      [Section 80DDB]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: This section provides deduction to an assessee, who is
       resident in India, being an individual and Hindu undivided family. The
       deduction is available to an individual for medical expenditure incurred on
       himself or a dependant. It is also available to a Hindu undivided family (HUF)
       for such expenditure incurred on any of its members.

(ii) Meaning of "Dependent":

Assessee                                           Dependent

(1) Individual the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the
                         individual or any of them, wholly or mainly dependant on
                         such individual for his support and maintenance.

(2) HUF   a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on
          such HUF for his support and maintenance.

(iii) Payment qualifying for deduction: Any amount actually paid for the
       medical treatment of such disease or ailment as may be specified by the
       Board for himself or a dependant, in case the assessee is an individual, or for
       any member of a HUF, in case the assessee is a HUF, will qualify for deduction.

(iv) Quantum of deduction: The amount of deduction under this section shall be
       equal to the amount actually paid or ` 40,000, whichever is less, in respect
       of that previous year in which such amount was actually paid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.43

In case the amount is paid in respect of a senior citizen, i.e., a resident
individual of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant
previous year, then the deduction would be the amount actually paid or
` 1,00,000, whichever is less.

The deduction under this section shall be reduced by the amount received, if
any, under an insurance from an insurer, or reimbursed by an employer, for
the medical treatment of the assessee or the dependant.

(v) Maximum deduction: The maximum limit of deduction under section 80DDB
       for these two categories of dependant are summarized hereunder:

                              Dependent            Maximum limit (`)
(1) A senior citizen, being a resident individual         1,00,000
(2) Other than a senior citizen                             40,000

(vi) Condition: No such deduction shall be allowed unless the assessee obtains
       the prescription for such medical treatment from a neurologist, an oncologist,
       a urologist, a hematologist, an immunologist or such other specialist, as may
       be prescribed.

2.9 Deduction in respect of interest on loan taken for higher
      education [Section 80E]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: Section 80E provides deduction to an individual-assessee
       in respect of any interest on loan paid by him in the previous year out of his
       income chargeable to tax.

(ii) Conditions: The loan must have been taken for the purpose of pursuing his
       higher education or for the purpose of higher education of his or her relative.
       The loan must have been taken from any financial institution or approved
       charitable institution.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.44          INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) Meaning of certain terms:

Term                                               Meaning

(a) Relative  Spouse and children of the individual or the student
              for whom the individual is the legal guardian

(b) Higher    It means any course of study (including vocational

education studies) pursued after passing the Senior Secondary

              Examination or its equivalent from any school, board

              or university recognised by the Central Government or

              State Government or local authority or by any other

              authority authorized by the Central Government or

              State Government or local authority to do so.

              Therefore, interest on loan taken for pursuing any

              course after Class XII or its equivalent, will qualify for

              deduction under section 80E.

(c) Period of The deduction is allowed in computing the total
       deduction income in respect of the initial assessment year (i.e. the
                          assessment year relevant to the previous year, in which
                          the assessee starts paying the interest on the loan) and
                          seven assessment years immediately succeeding the
                          initial assessment year or until the interest is paid in
                          full by the assessee, whichever is earlier.

(d) Approved It means an institution established for charitable
        charitable purposes and approved by the prescribed authority3

        institution or an institution referred to in section 80G(2)(a).

(e) Financial It means ­
       institution (a) a banking company to which the Banking
                                Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including a bank or
                                banking institution referred to in section 51 of the
                                Act); or

                          (b) any other financial institution which the Central
                                Government may, by notification in the Official
                                Gazette, specify in this behalf

3 under section 10(23C)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                           6.45

ILLUSTRATION 11

Mr. B has taken three education loans on April 1, 2025, the details of which are given
below:

For whose education loan was taken                 Loan 1       Loan 2          Loan 3
Purpose of loan                                              B  Son of B     Daughter of B
Amount of loan (`)
Annual repayment of loan (`)                            MBA          B. Sc.               B.A.
Annual repayment of interest (`)                   5,00,000     2,00,000            4,00,000
                                                   1,00,000
                                                                   40,000             80,000
                                                      20,000       10,000             18,000

Compute the amount deductible under section 80E for the A.Y.2026-27 if Mr. B has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

Deduction under section 80E is available to an individual assessee exercising the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A),
in respect of any interest paid by him in the previous year in respect of loan taken
for pursuing his higher education or higher education of his spouse or children.
Higher education means any course of study pursued after senior secondary
examination.

Therefore, interest repayment in respect of all the above loans would be eligible
for deduction.

Deduction under section 80E = ` 20,000 + ` 10,000 + ` 18,000 = ` 48,000.

2.10 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for
      acquisition of residential house property by an individual
      [Section 80EE]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of
       residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on
       such loan would qualify for deduction under this section.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.46                     INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as
       follows ­

                         Value of house  ` 50 lakhs

  The assessee should                              Conditions  Loan should be sanctioned
not own any residential                                          during the P.Y.2016-17

 house on the date of
    sanction of loan

                         Loan sanctioned  ` 35 lakhs

(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be
       available till the repayment of loan continues.

(iv) Quantum of deduction: The maximum deduction allowable is ` 50,000. The
       deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80EE is over and above the
       deduction of upto ` 2,00,000 available under section 24 for interest paid in
       respect of loan borrowed for acquisition of a self-occupied property.

(v) No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction
       under section 80EE will not be allowed as deduction under any other
       provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.

(vi) Meaning of certain terms:

Term                                               Meaning

(a) Financial · A banking company to which the Banking

institution              Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or

             · Any bank or banking institution referred to in
                  section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or

             · A housing finance company.

(b) Housing A public company formed or registered in India with
        finance the main object of carrying on the business of
        company providing long-term finance for construction or
                         purchase of houses in India for residential purposes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.47

ILLUSTRATION 12

Mr. A purchased a residential house property for self-occupation at a cost of ` 45
lakh on 1.4.2017, in respect of which he took a housing loan of ` 35 lakh from Bank
of India@11% p.a. on the same date. The loan was sanctioned on 28th March, 2017.
Compute the eligible deduction in respect of interest on housing loan for
A.Y.2026-27 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A), assuming that the entire loan was outstanding
as on 31.3.2026 and he does not own any other house property.

SOLUTION

                                       Particulars             `
Interest deduction for A.Y.2026-27
(i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the   2,00,000
                                                             50,000
          head "Income from house property"
          Deduction under section 24(b) ` 3,85,000
          [` 35,00,000 × 11%]
          Restricted to
(ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
          Deduction under section 80EE ` 1,85,000
           (` 3,85,000 ­ ` 2,00,000)
          Restricted to

2.11 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for
      acquisition of residential house property [Section 80EEA]

       [Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
       the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of
       residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on
       such loan would qualify for deduction under this section.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.48                   INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as
       follows ­

                                                   Stamp Duty Value of
                                                   house  ` 45 lakhs

The individual should                                    Conditions            Loan should be
     not own any                                                             sanctioned by the
                                                   The individual should    Financial Institution
residential house on                                 not be eligible to   between 1st April, 2019
the date of sanction                                                       and 31st March 2022
                                                    claim deduction u/s
         of loan                                              80EE

(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be
       available for interest payable for each assessment year.

(iv) Quantum of deduction: The maximum deduction allowable is ` 1,50,000.
       The deduction of upto ` 1,50,000 under section 80EEA is over and above the
       deduction available under section 24(b) in respect of interest payable on loan
       borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property.

(v) No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction
       under section 80EEA will not be allowed as deduction under any other
       provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.

(vi) Meaning of certain terms:

Term                                               Meaning

(a) Financial · A banking company to which the Banking

institution            Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or

             · Any bank or banking institution referred to in

                       section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or

             · A housing finance company.

(b) Housing A public company formed or registered in India with the
        finance main object of carrying on the business of providing
        company long-term finance for construction or purchase of
                         houses in India for residential purposes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                               6.49

In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC

Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan borrowed
         for acquisition of a residential house property

In case of self-occupied                           In case of let out or deemed
     house property                                    to be let out property

No interest deduction u/s                           No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest
             24(b)                                 payable is allowable as deduction.
                                                   However, loss from house property
No deduction u/s 80EEA                              cannot be set off against income

                                                           under any other head.

                                                      No deduction u/s 80EEA

In case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default
                   tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)

Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan borrowed
         for acquisition of a residential house property

In case of self-occupied                           In case of let out or deemed
     house property                                    to be let out property

restricted to ` 2,00,000 u/s 24(b)                   No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest
                                                    payable is allowable as deduction.
   Deduction for interest upto                       However, section 71(3A) restricts
  ` 1,50,000 can be claimed u/s                    set off of loss from house property
80EEA over and above deduction                       against income under any other

                u/s 24(b)                                     head to ` 2,00,000.

                                                   If there is a loss from house property and
                                                       it is more than ` 2,00,000, interest

                                                   u/s 24(b) can be claimed to the extent of
                                                    loss of ` 2,00,000 and balance interest

                                                         upto ` 1,50,000 can be claimed
                                                                       u/s 80EEA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.50                    INCOME TAX LAW

2.12 Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan taken
      for purchase of electric vehicle [Section 80EEB]

       [Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
       the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible Assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for purchase of an
       electric vehicle from any financial institution. Interest payable on such loan
       would qualify for deduction under this section.

(ii) Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as
       follows ­

                           Loan should be taken for
                        purchase of an electric vehicle

The assessee should be                             Conditions  Loan should be sanctioned
      an individual.                                              between 1.4.2019 and
                                                                          31.3.2023

                                             Loan should be sanctioned
                                              by a FI (bank or specified

                                                          NBFCs)

(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be
       available for interest payable on such loan for each assessment year.

(iv) Quantum of deduction: Interest payable, subject to a maximum of
       ` 1,50,000.

(v) No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction
       under section 80EEB will not be allowed as deduction under any other
       provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                    6.51

(vi) Meaning of certain terms:

                 Term                                  Meaning
      (a) Financial
                         · A banking company to which the Banking
            institution       Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or

      (b) Electric       · Any bank or banking institution referred to in
            Vehicle           section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or

                         · Any deposit taking NBFC; or

                         · A systemically important non-deposit taking NBFC
                              i.e., a NBFC which is not accepting or holding
                              public deposits and having total assets of not less
                              than ` 500 crore as per the last audited balance
                              sheet and is registered with the RBI.

                         A vehicle which is powered exclusively by an electric
                         motor whose traction energy is supplied exclusively by
                         traction battery installed in the vehicle. The vehicle
                         should have electric regenerative braking system,
                         which during braking provides for the conversion of
                         vehicle kinetic energy into electrical energy.

ILLUSTRATION 13

The following are the particulars relating to Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D, salaried
individuals, for A.Y. 2026-27 ­

Particulars              Mr. A                           Mr. B      Mr. C       Mr. D
                                                   ` 45 lakhs   ` 20 lakhs  ` 15 lakhs
Amount of loan ` 43 lakhs
taken

Loan taken from HFC                                Deposit taking Deposit   Public

                                                   NBFC         taking NBFC sector bank

Date of sanction 1.4.2021                          1.4.2020     1.4.2020    30.3.2019
of loan

Date         of 1.5.2021                           1.5.2020     1.5.2020    1.5.2019

disbursement of

loan

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          6.52             INCOME TAX LAW

Purpose of loan    Acquisition of                  Acquisition of      Purchase of   Purchase of
                                                                       electric      electric
                   residential                     residential         vehicle for   vehicle for
                                                                       personal use  personal
                   house property                  house property                    use

                   for          self-              for          self-

                   occupation                      occupation

Stamp duty value ` 45 lakhs                        ` 48 lakhs          -             -

of house property

Cost of electric        -                               -              ` 22 lakhs ` 18 lakhs

vehicle

Rate of interest 9% p.a.                           9% p.a.             10% p.a.      10% p.a.

Compute the amount of deduction, if any, allowable under the provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 for A.Y.2026-27 in the hands of Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D if
they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). Assume that there has been no principal repayment in respect
of any of the above loans upto 31.3.2026.

SOLUTION

                                      Particulars                                           `
Mr. A
Interest deduction for A.Y.2026-27                                                      2,00,000
(i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the                                1,50,000
                                                                                        2,00,000
       head "Income from house property"
       Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 3,87,000 [` 43,00,000 × 9%]
       Restricted to
(ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
       Deduction u/s 80EEA ` 1,87,000 (` 3,87,000 ­ ` 2,00,000)
       Restricted to
Mr. B
Interest deduction for A.Y.2026-27
(i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the
       head "Income from house property"

          Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 4,05,000 [` 45,00,000 × 9%]
          Restricted to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.53

(ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income                          Nil

          Deduction u/s 80EEA is not permissible since:                     1,50,000
                                                                                   Nil
          (i) loan is taken from NBFC

          (ii) stamp duty value exceeds ` 45 lakh.

          Deduction under section 80EEA would not be permissible
          due to either violation listed above.
Mr. C
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
Deduction u/s 80EEB for interest payable on loan taken for purchase of
electric vehicle [` 20 lakhs x 10% = ` 2,00,000, restricted to ` 1,50,000,
being the maximum permissible deduction]
Mr. D
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
Deduction u/s 80EEB is not permissible since loan was sanctioned
before 1.4.2019.

2.13 Deduction in respect of donations to certain funds,
      charitable institutions etc. [Section 80G]

(i) Eligible assessee: An assessee who pays any sum as donation to eligible
       funds or institutions, is entitled to a deduction, subject to certain limitations,
       from the gross total income.

       In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI
       or an artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have
       exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
       section 115BAC(1A). It would not be available if they pay concessional rates
       of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.

       In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be
       available if they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/115BAB and
       section 115BAD/115BAE, respectively. In other words, deduction would be
       available only if they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.54  INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Quantum of deduction:

       There are four categories of deductions. The following table gives the details
       of the institutions and funds to which donations can be made for the purpose
       of claiming deduction under section 80G, ­

            I Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, without any qualifying
                  limit

           (1) The National Defence Fund set up by the Central Government

           (2) Prime Minister's National Relief Fund.

           (3) Prime Minister's Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund

           (4) The Africa (Public Contributions-India) Fund

           (5) The National Children's Fund

           (6) The National Foundation for Communal Harmony

           (7) Approved University or educational institution of national eminence

           (8) Chief Minister's Earthquake Relief Fund, Maharashtra

           (9) Any fund set up by the State Government of Gujarat exclusively for
                  providing relief to the victims of the Gujarat earthquake

          (10) Any Zila Saksharta Samiti constituted in any district for improvement
                  of primary education in villages and towns and for literacy and post-
                  literacy activities

          (11) National Blood Transfusion Council or any State Blood Transfusion
                  Council whose sole objective is the control, supervision, regulation
                  or encouragement in India of the services related to operation and
                  requirements of blood banks

          (12) Any State Government Fund set up to provide medical relief to the
                  poor

          (13) The Army Central Welfare Fund or Indian Naval Benevolent Fund or Air
                  Force Central Welfare Fund established by the armed forces of the
                  Union for the welfare of past and present members of such forces or
                  their dependents.

          (14) The Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister's Cyclone Relief Fund, 1996

          (15) The National Illness Assistance Fund

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.55

(16) The Chief Minister's Relief Fund or Lieutenant Governor's Relief Fund
        in respect of any State or Union Territory

(17) The National Sports Development Fund set up by the Central
        Government

(18) The National Cultural Fund set up by the Central Government

(19) The Fund for Technology Development and Application set up by
        the Central Government

(20) National Trust for welfare of persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
        Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities

(21) The Swachh Bharat Kosh, set up by the Central Government, other than
        the sum spent by the assessee in pursuance of CSR u/s 135(5) of the
        Companies Act, 2013

(22) The Clean Ganga Fund, set up by the Central Government, where
        such assessee is a resident, other than the sum spent in pursuance
        of CSR u/s 135(5) of the Companies Act, 2013

(23) The National Fund for Control of Drug Abuse

(24) Prime Minister's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations
        Fund (PM Cares Fund)

 II Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, without any qualifying limit

(1) Prime Minister's Drought Relief Fund

 III Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, subject to qualifying limit

(1) The Government or to any approved local authority, institution or
        association for promotion of family planning

(2) Sum paid by a company as donation to the Indian Olympic
        Association or any other association/institution established in India,
        as may be notified by the Government for the development of
        infrastructure for sports or games, or the sponsorship of sports and
        games in India

 IV Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit

(1) Any Institution or Fund established in India for charitable purposes
        fulfilling prescribed conditions

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         6.56  INCOME TAX LAW

(2) The Government or any local authority for utilisation for any charitable
       purpose other than the purpose of promoting family planning

(3) An authority constituted in India by or under any other law enacted
       either for dealing with and satisfying the need for housing
       accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or
       improvement of cities, towns and villages, or both

(4) Any Corporation established by the Central Government or any State
       Government for promoting the interests of the members of a
       minority community

(5) for renovation or repair of Notified temple, mosque, gurdwara,
       church or other place of historic, archaeological or artistic
       importance or which is a place of public worship of renown
       throughout any State or States

(iii) Qualifying limit: The eligible donations referred to in III and IV should be
       aggregated and the sum total should be limited to 10% of the adjusted gross
       total income. This would be the maximum permissible deduction.

The donations qualifying for 100% deduction would be first adjusted from
the maximum permissible deduction and thereafter 50% deduction of the
balance would be allowed.

Steps for computation of qualifying limit

Step 1:  Compute adjusted total income i.e., the GTI as reduced by the
         following:
Step 2:  (i) Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except under section 80G
Step 3:  (ii) Short-term capital gain taxable under section 111A
Step 4:  (iii) Long-term capital gains taxable under sections 112 & 112A
Step 5:  (iv) Any income on which income-tax is not payable

         Calculate 10% of adjusted total income

         Calculate the actual donation, which is subject to qualifying limit
         (Total of Category III and IV donations, shown in the table above)

         Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum permissible deduction.

         The said deduction is adjusted first against donations qualifying
         for 100% deduction (i.e., Category III donations). Thereafter, 50%
         of balance qualifies for deduction under section 80G.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.57

(iv) Other points:

       (1) Where an assessee has claimed and has been allowed any deduction
               under this section in respect of any amount of donation, the same
               amount will not qualify for deduction under any other provision of the
               Act for the same or any other assessment year.

       (2) Donations in kind shall not qualify for deduction.

       (3) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum
               exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash.

       (4) The deduction under section 80G can be claimed whether it has any
               nexus with the business of the assessee or not.

       (5) As per Circular No.2/2005 dated 12.1.2005, in cases where employees
               make donations to the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund, the Chief
               Minister's Relief Fund or the Lieutenant Governor's Relief Fund through
               their respective employers, it is not possible for such funds to issue
               separate certificate to every such employee in respect of donations
               made to such funds as contributions made to these funds are in the
               form of a consolidated cheque. An employee who makes donations
               towards these funds is eligible to claim deduction under section 80G. It
               is, hereby, clarified that the claim in respect of such donations as
               indicated above will be admissible under section 80G on the basis of
               the certificate issued by the Drawing and Disbursing Officer
               (DDO)/Employer in this behalf.

       (6) The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any donation made
               to an institution or fund [referred to in point (1) under (IV) "Donation
               qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit"], in the return
               of income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the
               basis of information relating to said donation furnished by the
               institution or fund to the prescribed income-tax authority or person
               authorized by such authority, subject to verification as per the risk
               management strategy formulated by the CBDT from time to time.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          6.58   INCOME TAX LAW

ILLUSTRATION 14

Mr. Shiva aged 58 years, has gross total income of ` 7,75,000 comprising of income
from salary and house property. He has made the following payments and
investments:

(i) Premium paid to insure the life of her major daughter (policy taken on 1.4.2019)
       (Assured value ` 1,80,000) ­ ` 20,000.

(ii) Medical Insurance premium for self ­ ` 12,000; Spouse ­ ` 14,000.

(iii) Donation to a public charitable institution ` 50,000 by way of cheque.

(iv) LIC Pension Fund ­ ` 60,000.

(v) Donation to National Children's Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque

(vi) Donation to Prime Minister's Drought Relief Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque

(vii) Donation to approved institution for promotion of family planning - ` 40,000
       by way of cheque

(viii) Deposit in PPF ­ ` 1,00,000

Compute the total income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2026-27 if he exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

Computation of Total Income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2026-27

                              Particulars                       `           `
Gross Total Income                                                      7,75,000
Less: Deduction under section 80C                           1,00,000
                                                              18,000    1,50,000
       Deposit in PPF
       Life insurance premium paid for insurance of         1,18,000
       major daughter (Maximum 10% of the assured value       60,000
       ` 1,80,000, as the policy is taken after 31.3.2012)
                                                            1,78,000
       Deduction under section 80CCC in respect of LIC
       pension fund

As per section 80CCE, deduction under section 80C &
80CCC is restricted to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                                   6.59

Deduction under section 80D                                 26,000
Medical Insurance premium in respect of self and spouse
Restricted to                                                                              25,000
Deduction under section 80G (See Working Note
below)                                                                                        87,500
Total income                                                                               5,12,500

Working Note: Computation of deduction under section 80G

Particulars of donation                            Amount   % of deduction Deduction
                                                   donated                             u/s 80G (`)

                                                       (`)

(i) National Children's Fund                       25,000   100%                           25,000

(ii) Prime  Minister's                             25,000   50%                            12,500

Drought Relief Fund

(iii) Approved institution for                     40,000 100%, subject to                 40,000
        promotion of family                                        qualifying limit
        planning

(iv) Public Charitable Trust                       50,000      50% subject to
                                                               qualifying limit
                                                            (See Note below)               10,000

                                                                                           87,500

Note - Adjusted total income = Gross Total Income ­ Amount of deductions under
section 80C to 80U except section 80G i.e., ` 6,00,000, in this case.

` 60,000, being 10% of adjusted total income is the qualifying limit, in this case.

Firstly, donation of ` 40,000 to approved institution for family planning qualifying
for 100% deduction subject to qualifying limit, has to be adjusted against this
amount. Thereafter, donation to public charitable trust qualifying for 50%
deduction, subject to qualifying limit is adjusted. Hence, the contribution of
` 50,000 to public charitable trust is restricted to 20,000 (being, ` 60,000 - ` 40,000),
50% of which would be the deduction under section 80G. Therefore, the deduction
under section 80G in respect of donation to public charitable trust would be
` 10,000, which is 50% of ` 20,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.60  INCOME TAX LAW

2.14 Deduction in respect of rent paid [Section 80GG]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: Assessee, who is not in receipt of HRA qualifying for
       exemption under section 10(13A) from employer and who pays rent for
       accommodation occupied by him for residential purposes.

(ii) Conditions: The following conditions have to be satisfied for claiming
       deduction under section 80GG -

       (1) The assessee should not be receiving any house rent allowance exempt
               under section 10(13A).

       (2) The expenditure incurred by him on rent of any furnished or
               unfurnished accommodation should exceed 10% of his total income
               arrived at after all deductions under Chapter VI-A except section 80GG.

       (3) The accommodation should be occupied by the assessee for the
               purposes of his own residence.

       (4) The assessee should fulfill such other conditions or limitations as may
               be prescribed, having regard to the area or place in which such
               accommodation is situated and other relevant considerations.

       (5) The assessee or his spouse or his minor child or a HUF of which he is a
               member should not own any accommodation at the place where he
               ordinarily resides or perform duties of his office or employment or
               carries on his business or profession; or

       (6) If the assessee owns any accommodation at any place other than that
               referred to above, such accommodation should not be in the
               occupation of the assessee and its annual value is not required to be
               determined under section 23(2)(a) or section 23(4)(a).

       (7) The assessee should file a declaration in the prescribed form,
               confirming the details of rent paid and fulfillment of other conditions,
               with the return of income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                6.61

(iii) Quantum of deduction: The deduction admissible will be the least of the
       following:

      (1) Actual rent paid minus 10% of the total income of the assessee before
             allowing the deduction, or

      (2) 25% of such total income (arrived at after making all deductions under
             Chapter VI-A but before making any deduction under this section), or

      (3) Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m.

ILLUSTRATION 15

Mr. Ganesh, a businessman, whose total income (before allowing deduction under
section 80GG) for A.Y.2026-27 is ` 4,60,000, paid house rent at ` 12,000 p.m. in respect
of residential accommodation occupied by him at Mumbai. Compute the deduction
allowable to him under section 80GG for A.Y.2026-27 if he has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

The deduction under section 80GG will be computed as follows:

(i) Actual rent paid less 10% of total income

      ` 1,44,000 (-) (10×4,60,000) = ` 98,000
                              100

(ii)  25%  of  total  income  =  25× 4, 60, 000    = ` 1,15,000
                                      100

(iii) Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m. = ` 60,000

Deduction allowable u/s 80GG [least of (i), (ii) and (iii)] = ` 60,000

2.15 Deduction in respect of donations for scientific research
      and rural development [Section 80GGA]

(i) Eligible assessee: Any assessee not having income chargeable under the
       head "Profits and gains of business or profession", who makes donations for
       scientific research or rural development.

       An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an
       artificial juridical person will be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGA only if they
       have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
       under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.62  INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Donations qualifying for deduction:

       (1) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to a research
               association which has, as its object, the undertaking of scientific
               research or to a University, college or other institution to be used for
               scientific research;

               Such association, University, college or institution must be approved
               under section 35(1)(ii).

       (2) Any sum paid to a research association which has as its object the
               undertaking of research in social science or statistical research,
               University, College or other institution to be used for research in social
               science or statistical research.

               Such association, University, college or institution must be approved
               under section 35(1)(iii).

       (3) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to an association or
               institution which has as its object the undertaking of any programme of
               rural development, to be used for carrying out any programme of rural
               development approved by the prescribed authority for purposes of
               section 35CCA or to an institution or association which has as its object
               the training of persons for implementing programmes of rural
               development.

               It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor)
               is entitled on account of payment of any sum to

               - a research association or university or college or other institution
                       for scientific research or research in a social science or statistical
                       research or

               - an association or institution for carrying out the programme of
                       rural development or

               shall not be denied merely on the ground that subsequent to payment
               of such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to any of the
               aforesaid entities is withdrawn.

       (4) Any sum paid to a public sector company or a local authority or to an
               association or institution approved by the National Committee for
               carrying out any eligible project or scheme.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.63

               It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor)
               is entitled on account of above shall not be denied merely on the
               ground that subsequent to payment of such sum by the assessee, the
               approval granted to any of the aforesaid entities is withdrawn or the
               notification notifying the eligible project or scheme carried out
               aforesaid entities has been withdrawn.

       (5) Any sum paid to a rural development fund set up and notified under
               section 35CCA.

       (6) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to National Urban
               Poverty Eradication Fund (NUPEF).

(iii) Restrictions on deduction:

       (1) No deduction under this section would be allowed in the case of an
               assessee whose gross total income includes income which is chargeable
               under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession."

       (2) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any
               assessment year, deduction shall not be allowed in respect of such
               payment under any provision of this Act for the same or any other
               assessment year.

       (3) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum
               exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash.

       (4) The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any sum referred
               to under "(ii) Donations qualifying for deduction" in the return of
               income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the
               basis of information relating to such sum furnished by the payee to the
               prescribed income-tax authority or person authorized by such
               authority, subject to verification as per the risk management strategy
               formulated by the CBDT from time to time.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.64  INCOME TAX LAW

2.16 Deduction in respect of contributions given by
      companies to political parties [Section 80GGB]

(i) Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum
       contributed in the previous year by an Indian company4 to any political party
       or an electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of
       any sum contributed by way of cash.

(ii) Meaning of "Contribute": For the purposes of this section, the word
       "contribute" has the same meaning assigned to it under section 293A of the
       Companies Act, 19565, which provides that -

       (a) a donation or subscription or payment given by a company to a person
               for carrying on any activity which is likely to effect public support for a
               political party shall also be deemed to be contribution for a political
               purpose;

       (b) the expenditure incurred, directly or indirectly, by a company on
               advertisement in any publication (being a publication in the nature of a
               souvenir, brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like) by or on behalf of a
               political party or for its advantage shall also be deemed to be a
               contribution to such political party or a contribution for a political
               purpose to the person publishing it.

(iii) Meaning of "Political party": It means a political party registered under
       section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

ILLUSTRATION 16

During the P.Y. 2025-26, ABC Ltd., an Indian company,

(1) contributed a sum of ` 2 lakh to an electoral trust; and

(2) incurred expenditure of ` 25,000 on advertisement in a brochure of a political
       party.

Is the company eligible for deduction in respect of such contribution/expenditure,
assuming that the contribution was made by cheque? If so, what is the quantum of
deduction? ABC Ltd. does not opt for section 115BAA/115BAB.

4 Not opting for section 115BAA/ 115BAB
5Now section 182 of the Companies Act, 2013

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.65

SOLUTION

An Indian company is eligible for deduction under section 80GGB in respect of any
sum contributed by it in the previous year to any political party or an electoral trust.
Further, the word "contribute" in section 80GGB has the meaning assigned to it in
section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956, and accordingly, it includes the amount
of expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.

Therefore, ABC Ltd. is eligible for a deduction of ` 2,25,000 under section 80GGB in
respect of sum of ` 2 lakh contributed to an electoral trust and ` 25,000 incurred
by it on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.

It may be noted that there is a specific disallowance under section 37(2B) in respect of
expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party. Therefore, the
expenditure of ` 25,000 would be disallowed while computing business income/gross
total income. However, the said expenditure incurred by an Indian company is
allowable as a deduction from gross total income under section 80GGB.

2.17 Deduction in respect of contributions given by any
      person to political parties [Section 80GGC]

(i) Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum
       contributed in the previous year by any person to a political party or an
       electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum
       contributed by way of cash.

(ii) Persons not eligible for deduction: This deduction will, however, not be
       available to a local authority and an artificial juridical person, wholly or partly
       funded by the Government.

(iii) Meaning of "Political party": It means a political party registered under
       section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

                An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI
                would be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGC only if they have exercised
                the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
 section 115BAC(1A). A co-operative society will not be eligible for deduction if it
 opts for special provisions of section 115BAD/115BAE.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.66                   INCOME TAX LAW

    3. DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN INCOMES

3.1 Deduction in respect of employment of new employees
      [Section 80JJAA]

(i) Quantum and period of deduction: Where the gross total income of an
       assessee to whom section 44AB applies, includes any profits and gains
       derived from business, a deduction of an amount equal to 30% of additional
       employee cost incurred in the course of such business in the previous year,
       would be allowed for three assessment years including the assessment year
       relevant to the previous year in which such employment is provided.

(ii) Conditions to be fulfilled: The deduction would be allowed only subject to
       fulfilment of the following conditions:

The business should         The business is          The report of the accountant,
  not be formed by     not acquired by the         giving the prescribed particulars,
 splitting up, or the  assessee by way of          has to be furnished before 30th
                                                   September of the A.Y., being the
reconstruction, of an   transfer from any
  existing business    other person or as             specified date referred to in
                                                    Section 44AB i.e., the date one
                          a result of any
                              business                month prior to due date for
                                                           filing ROI u/s 139(1)
                          reorganisation

(iii) Meaning of certain terms:

           Term                                       Meaning

(a) Additional         Total emoluments paid or payable to additional
      employee         employees employed during the previous year.
      cost

                       In the case of              The additional employee cost shall be
                       an existing                 Nil, if -
                       business
                                                   (a) there is no increase in the number
                                                        of employees from the total
                                                        number of employees employed
                                                        as on the last day of the preceding
                                                        year;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME  6.67

                               (b) emoluments are paid otherwise
                                    than by an account payee cheque
                                    or account payee bank draft or by
                                    use of electronic clearing system
                                    through a bank account or through
                                    any other prescribed electronic
                                    mode [credit card, debit card, net
                                    banking, IMPS (Immediate
                                    Payment Services), UPI (Unified
                                    Payment Interface), RTGS (Real
                                    Time Gross Settlement), NEFT
                                    (National Electronic Fund Transfer),
                                    BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money)
                                    Aadhar Pay].

                In the first   The emoluments paid6 or payable to
                year of a new  employees employed during that
                business       previous year shall be deemed to be
                               the additional employee cost.

(b) Additional  An employee who has been employed during the
      employee  previous year and whose employment has the effect of
                increasing the total number of employees employed
                by the employer as on the last day of the preceding
                year.

                Exclusions from the definition:

                (a) an employee whose total emoluments are more
                     than ` 25,000 per month; or

                (b) an employee for whom the entire contribution is
                     paid by the Government under the Employees'
                     Pension Scheme notified in accordance with the
                     provisions of the Employees' Provident Funds and
                     Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952; or

                (c) an employee who does not participate in the
                     recognised provident fund.

6 As per Form No.10DA read with Rule 19AB, the amount shall not include emoluments paid
otherwise than by way of account payee cheque/bank draft/ECS through a bank account and
prescribed electronic modes

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.68  INCOME TAX LAW

                          (d) an employee employed for a period of less than
                                240 days during the previous year. In case of an
                                assessee engaged in the business of
                                manufacturing of apparel or footwear or leather
                                products, an employee employed for a period of
                                less than 150 days during the previous year; or

                          Note ­ If an employee is employed during the previous
                          year for less than 240 days or 150 days, as the case may
                          be, but is employed for a period of 240 days or 150
                          days, as the case may be, in the immediately
                          succeeding year, he shall be deemed to have been
                          employed in the succeeding year.

                          Accordingly, the employer would be entitled to
                          deduction of 30% of additional employee cost of such
                          employees for three years from the succeeding year.

(c) Emoluments any sum paid or payable to an employee in lieu of his
                          employment by whatever name called.

                          Exclusions from the definition:

                          (a) any contribution paid or payable by the
                                   employer to any pension fund or provident fund
                                   or any other fund for the benefit of the employee
                                   under any law for the time being in force; and

                          (b) any lump-sum payment paid or payable to an
                                   employee at the time of termination of his
                                   service or superannuation or voluntary
                                   retirement, such as gratuity, severance pay, leave
                                   encashment, voluntary retrenchment benefits,
                                   commutation of pension and the like.

Deduction u/s 80JJAA would be available to an assessee irrespective of
the regime under which he pays tax.

ILLUSTRATION 17
Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of computers on 1.4.2025. He
employed 350 new employees during the P.Y. 2025-26, the details of whom are as
follows ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                    6.69

          No. of   Date of                         Regular/   Total monthly
                                                    Casual   emoluments per
       employees employment
                                                               employee (`)
(i)           75   1.4.2025                        Regular
                   1.5.2025                        Regular          24,000
(ii)          125  1.8.2025                        Casual
                   1.9.2025                        Regular          26,000
(iii)         50
                                                                    24,500
(iv)          100
                                                                    24,000

The regular employees participate in recognized provident fund while the casual
employees do not. Compute the deduction, if any, available to Mr. A for
A.Y. 2026-27, if the profits and gains derived from manufacture of computers that
year is ` 75 lakhs and his total turnover is ` 10.16 crores.

What would be your answer if Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of
footwear on 1.4.2025?

SOLUTION

Mr. A is eligible for deduction under section 80JJAA since he is subject to tax audit
under section 44AB for A.Y. 2026-27 and he has employed "additional employees"
during the P.Y. 2025-26.

I If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of computers

     Additional employee cost = ` 24,000 × 12 × 75 [See Working Note below]
     = ` 2,16,00,000
     Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ` 2,16,00,000 = ` 64,80,000.
     Working Note:
     Number of additional employees

                   Particulars                                 No. of
                                                             workmen

       Total number of employees employed during the year                    350

       Less:  Casual employees employed on 1.8.2025 who do 50
              not participate in recognized provident fund

              Regular employees employed on 1.5.2025, since 125
              their total monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         6.70  INCOME TAX LAW

         Regular employees employed on 1.9.2025 since
         they have been employed for less than 240 days in 100 275
         the P.Y.2025-26.

Number of "additional employees"                   75

Notes ­

(i) Since casual employees do not participate in recognized provident fund,
       they do not qualify as additional employees. Further, 125 regular
       employees employed on 1.5.2025 also do not qualify as additional
       employees since their monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000. Also, 100
       regular employees employed on 1.9.2025 do not qualify as additional
       employees for the P.Y.2025-26, since they are employed for less than 240
       days in that year.

Therefore, only 75 employees employed on 1.4.2025 qualify as additional
employees, and the total emoluments paid or payable to them during the
P.Y.2025-26 is deemed to be the additional employee cost.

(ii) As regards 100 regular employees employed on 1.9.2025, they would be
       treated as additional employees for previous year 2025-26, if they
       continue to be employees in that year for a minimum period of 240 days.
       Accordingly, 30% of additional employee cost in respect of such
       employees would be allowable as deduction under section 80JJAA in the
       hands of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2026-27.

II If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear

       If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear, then, he would
       be entitled to deduction under section 80JJAA in respect of employee cost of
       regular employees employed on 1.9.2025, since they have been employed for
       more than 150 days in the previous year 2025-26.

       Additional employee cost = ` 2,16,00,000 + ` 24,000 × 7 × 100 = ` 3,84,00,000

       Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ` 3,84,00,000 = ` 1,15,20,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.71

3.2 Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors
      of certain books other than text books [Section 80QQB]

       [Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
       the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee & Quantum of deduction: Under section 80QQB,
       deduction of up to a maximum ` 3,00,000 is allowed to an individual resident
       in India in respect of income derived as author or joint author i.e., the
       deduction shall be the income derived as author or as joint author or
       ` 3,00,000, whichever is less.

(ii) Eligible Income:

       (a) This income may be received either by way of a lumpsum consideration
               for the assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of
               any book.

       (b) Such book should be a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature, or of
               royalties or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or
               otherwise) in respect of such book.

       (c) This deduction shall not, however, be available in respect of royalty
               income from textbook for schools, guides, commentaries, brochures,
               diaries, magazines, newspapers, journals, pamphlets, tracts and other
               publications of similar nature.

       Note - Where an assessee claims deduction under this section, no deduction
       in respect of the same income may be claimed under any other provision of
       the Income-tax Act, 1961.

(iii) Manner of computation of deduction: For the purpose of calculating the
       deduction under this section, the amount of eligible income (royalty or
       copyright fee received otherwise than by way of lumpsum) before allowing
       expenses attributable to such income, shall not exceed 15% of the value of
       the books sold during the previous year.

       However, this condition is not applicable where the royalty or copyright fees
       is receivable in lump sum in lieu of all rights of the author in the book.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.72  INCOME TAX LAW

(iv) Conditions:

       (a) Furnishing of certificate in prescribed form: For claiming the
               deduction, the assessee shall have to furnish a certificate in the
               prescribed manner in the prescribed format, duly verified by the person
               responsible for making such payment, setting forth such particulars as
               may be prescribed.

       (b) Period for repatriation of income earned outside India: Where the
               assessee earns any income from any source outside India, he should
               bring such income into India in convertible foreign exchange within a
               period of six months from the end of the previous year in which such
               income is earned or within such further period as the competent
               authority may allow in this behalf for the purpose of claiming deduction
               under this section.

               The competent authority shall mean the Reserve Bank of India or such
               other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in
               force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.

ILLUSTRATION 18

Mr. Aakash earned royalty of ` 2,88,000 from a foreign country for a book authored
by him, being a work of literary nature. The rate of royalty is 18% of value of books.
The expenditure incurred by him for earning this royalty was ` 40,000. The amount
remitted to India till 30th September, 2026 is ` 2,30,000. The remaining amount was
not remitted till 31st March, 2027. Compute the amount includible in the gross total
income of Mr. Aakash and the amount of deduction which he will be eligible for under
section 80QQB if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

The net royalty of ` 2,48,000 (i.e., royalty of ` 2,88,000 less ` 40,000, being
expenditure to earn such income) is includible in gross total income. Deduction u/s
80QQB would be ` 1,90,000 as calculated hereunder ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.73

                                      Particulars                     `
Royalty ` 2,88,000 x 15/18 = ` 2,40,000
Restricted to                                                     2,30,000
Amount brought into India in convertible foreign exchange within     40,000
the prescribed time
Less: Expenses already allowed as deduction while computing       1,90,000
royalty income

Deduction u/s 80QQB

3.3 Deduction in respect of royalty on patents
      [Section 80RRB]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: A resident individual who is registered as the true and first
       inventor in respect of an invention under the Patents Act, 1970, including the
       co-owner of the patent and earning income by way of royalty of a patent
       registered on or after 1.4.2003.

(ii) Quantum of deduction: Income by way of royalty of a patent registered on
       or after 1.4.2003, subject to a maximum of ` 3 lakhs.

       Note - No deduction in respect of such income will be allowed under any
       other provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961

(iii) Eligible income: This exemption shall be restricted to the royalty income
       including consideration for transfer of rights in the patent or for providing
       information for working or use of a patent, use of a patent or the rendering
       of any services in connection with these activities.

       The exemption shall not be available on any consideration for sale of product
       manufactured with the use of the patented process or patented article for
       commercial use.

(iv) Conditions: In respect of any such income which is earned from sources
       outside India, the deduction shall be restricted to such sum as is brought to
       India in convertible foreign exchange within a period of 6 months from the end
       of the previous year in which such income is earned or extended period as is
       allowed by the competent authority (Reserve Bank of India). For claiming this
       deduction the assessee shall be required to furnish a certificate in the
       prescribed form signed by the prescribed authority.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.74  INCOME TAX LAW

    4. DEDUCTION IN RESPECT OF OTHER INCOME

4.1 Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in savings
      accounts [Section 80TTA]

[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee and Quantum of deduction: Section 80TTA provides that
       in case the gross total income of an assessee, being an individual or a Hindu
       Undivided Family, includes any income by way of an interest on deposits in a
       saving account (not being time deposits, which are deposits repayable on
       expiry of fixed periods), deduction up to ` 10,000 in aggregate shall be
       allowed while computing the total income of such assessee. Such deduction
       shall be allowed in case the saving account is maintained with:

       (1) a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies
               (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of
               that Act);

       (2) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking
               (including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land
               development bank); or

       (3) a post office.

                      Deduction under this section would, however, not be available to
                      a senior citizen eligible for deduction under section 80TTB.

(ii) Restrictions: If the aforesaid income is derived from any deposit in a savings
       account held by, or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP/BOI, no deduction shall be
       allowed in respect of such income in computing the total income of any
       partner of the firm or any member of the AOP or any individual of the BOI.

       In effect, the deduction under this section shall be allowed only in respect of
       the income derived in form of the interest on the saving bank deposit (other
       than time deposits) made by the individual or Hindu Undivided Family
       directly.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.75

4.2 Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in case of
      senior citizens [Section 80TTB]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Eligible assessee: A senior citizen (a resident individual who is of the age of
       60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year), whose gross
       total income includes income by way of interest on deposits (both fixed
       deposits and saving accounts) with ­

       (a) a banking company to which Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies

       (b) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking
               (including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land
               development bank)

       (c) a Post Office.

(ii) Quantum of deduction: Actual amount of interest on deposits or
        ` 50,000, whichever is lower.

(iii) Non-availability of deduction to partner/member, where deposit held by
       firm/AOP/BOI: Where interest income is derived from any deposit held by,
       or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP or a BOI, the partner of the firm or member of
       AOP/BOI would not be allowed deduction in respect of such income while
       computing their total income.

ILLUSTRATION 19

Mr. A, a resident individual aged 61 years, has earned business income (computed)
of ` 1,35,000, lottery income of ` 1,20,000 (gross) during the P.Y. 2025-26. He also
has interest on Fixed Deposit of ` 30,000 with banks. He invested an amount of
` 1,50,000 in Public Provident Fund account. What is the total income of Mr. A for
the A.Y. 2026-27 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A)?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          6.76  INCOME TAX LAW

SOLUTION

          Computation of total income of Mr. A for A.Y.2026-27

                                Particulars          `          `
Profits and gains of business or profession
Income from other sources                                       1,35,000
- Interest on Fixed Deposit with banks
- lottery income                                                   30,000
Gross Total Income                                              1,20,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VIA [See Note below]             2,85,000

       Under section 80C                             1,50,000
       - Deposit in Public Provident Fund
       Under section 80TTB                             30,000
        - Interest on fixed deposits with banks      1,80,000

Restricted to                                                   1,65,000
Total Income                                                    1,20,000

Note: In case of resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more, interest on bank
fixed deposits qualifies for deduction upto ` 50,000 under section 80TTB.

Though the aggregate of deductions under Chapter VI-A is ` 1,80,000, however, the
maximum permissible deduction cannot exceed the gross total income exclusive of long
term capital gains taxable under section 112 and section 112A, short-term capital gains
covered under section 111A and winnings from lotteries of the assessee.

Therefore, the maximum permissible deduction under Chapter VI-A = ` 2,85,000 ­
` 1,20,000 = ` 1,65,000.

ILLUSTRATION 20

Mr. Gurnam, aged 42 years, has salary income (computed) of ` 5,50,000 for the
previous year ended 31.03.2026. He has earned interest of ` 14,500 on the saving
bank account with State Bank of India during the year. Compute the total income of
Mr. Gurnam for the assessment year 2026-27 from the following particulars,
assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A):

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                             6.77

(i) Life insurance premium paid to Birla Sunlife Insurance in cash amounting to
       ` 25,000 for insurance of life of his dependent parents. The insurance policy
       was taken on 15.07.2021 and the sum assured on life of his dependent parents
       is ` 2,00,000.

(ii) Life insurance premium of ` 19,500 paid for the insurance of life of his major
       son who is not dependent on him. The sum assured on life of his son is
       ` 3,50,000 and the life insurance policy was taken on 30.3.2012.

(iii) Life insurance premium paid by cheque of ` 22,500 for insurance of his life. The
       insurance policy was taken on 08.09.2020 and the sum assured is
       ` 2,00,000.

(iv) Premium of ` 26,000 paid by cheque for health insurance of self and his wife.

(v) ` 1,500 paid in cash for his health check-up and ` 4,500 paid in cheque for
       preventive health check-up for his parents, who are senior citizens.

(vi) Paid interest of ` 6,500 on loan taken from bank for MBA course pursued by his
       daughter.

(vii) A sum of ` 5,000 donated in cash to an institution approved for purpose of
       section 80G for promoting family planning.

SOLUTION

          Computation of total income of Mr. Gurnam for the
                             Assessment Year 2026-27

                          Particulars                  `    `        `
Income from salary
Interest on saving bank deposit                     19,500           5,50,000
Gross Total Income                                  20,000              14,500
Less: Deduction under Chapter VIA                   25,000
Under section 80C (See Note 1)                                       5,64,500
- major son
- self ` 22,500 restricted to 10% of ` 2,00,000             39,500
Under section 80D (See Note 2)
Premium paid for ` 26,000 health insurance of self
and wife by cheque, restricted to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        6.78  INCOME TAX LAW

Payment made for health check-up for parents       4,500 29,500
                                                                6,500
Under section 80E
For payment of interest on loan taken from bank               10,000 85,500
for MBA course of his daughter                                             4,79,000
Under section 80TTA (See Note 4)
Interest on savings bank account ` 14,500
restricted to

Total Income

Notes:

(1) As per section 80C, no deduction is allowed in respect of premium paid for
       life insurance of parents, whether they are dependent or not. Therefore, no
       deduction is allowable in respect of ` 25,000 paid as premium for life
       insurance of dependent parents of Mr. Gurnam.

In respect of insurance policy issued on or after 01.04.2012, deduction shall
be allowed for life insurance premium paid only to the extent of 10% of sum
assured. In case the insurance policy is issued before 01.04.2012, deduction
of premium paid on life insurance policy shall be allowed up to 20% of sum
assured.

Therefore, in the present case, deduction of ` 19,500 is allowable in full in
respect of life insurance of Mr. Gurnam's son since the insurance policy was
issued before 01.04.2012 and the premium amount is less than 20% of
` 3,50,000. However, in respect of premium paid for life insurance policy of
Mr. Gurnam himself, deduction is allowable only up to 10% of ` 2,00,000
since, the policy was issued on or after 01.04.2012 and the premium amount
exceeds 10% of sum assured.

(2) As per section 80D, in case the premium is paid in respect of health of a
       person specified therein and for health check-up of such person, deduction
       shall be allowed up to ` 25,000. Further, deduction up to ` 5,000 in aggregate
       shall be allowed in respect of health check-up of self, spouse, children and
       parents. In order to claim deduction under section 80D, the payment for
       health-checkup can be made in any mode including cash. However, the
       payment for health insurance premium has to be paid in any mode other than
       cash.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.79

       Therefore, in the present case, in respect of premium of ` 26,000 paid for
       health insurance of self and wife, deduction would be restricted to
       ` 25,000. Since the limit of ` 25,000 has been exhausted against medical
       insurance premium, no deduction is allowable for preventive health check-up
       for self and wife. However, deduction of ` 4,500 is allowable in respect of
       health check-up of his parents, since it falls within the limit of ` 5,000.

(3) No deduction shall be allowed under section 80G in case the donation is
       made in cash of a sum exceeding ` 2,000. Therefore, deduction under section
       80G is not allowable in respect of cash donation of ` 5,000 made to an
       institution approved for the purpose of section 80G for promotion of family
       planning.

(4) As per section 80TTA, deduction shall be allowed from the gross total income
       of an individual or Hindu Undivided Family in respect of income by way of
       interest on deposit in the savings account included in the assessee's gross
       total income, subject to a maximum of ` 10,000. Therefore, deduction of
       ` 10,000 is allowable from the gross total income of Mr. Gurnam, though the
       interest from savings bank account is ` 14,500.

    5. OTHER DEDUCTIONS

Deduction in the case of a person with disability
[Section 80U]

[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]

(i) Section 80U harmonizes the criteria for defining disability as existing under
       the Income-tax Rules with the criteria prescribed under the Persons with
       Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation)
       Act, 1995.

(ii) Eligible assessee: This section is applicable to a resident individual, who, at
       any time during the previous year, is certified by the medical authority to be
       a person with disability.

       The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to persons
       suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.80  INCOME TAX LAW

(iii) Quantum of deduction: A deduction of ` 75,000 in respect of a person with
       disability and ` 1,25,000 in respect of a person with severe disability (having
       disability over 80%) is allowable under this section.

(iv) Conditions:

       (a) The assessee claiming a deduction under this section shall furnish a
               copy of the certificate issued by the medical authority in the form and
               manner, as may be prescribed, along with the return of income under
               section 139, in respect of the assessment year for which the deduction
               is claimed.

       (b) Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh
               certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after
               the expiry of the period mentioned on the original certificate in order
               to continue to claim the deduction.

    6. DEDUCTION UNDER SECTION 10AA

A deduction of profits and gains which are derived by an assessee being an
entrepreneur from the export of articles or things or providing any service, shall be
allowed from the total income of the assessee.

In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an
artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A). The deduction would be available only under the optional tax regime,
where they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.

In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be available
if they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/ 115BAB and section 115BAD/
115BAE, respectively. The deduction would be available if they pay tax under the
normal provisions of the Act.

(1) Assessees who are eligible for exemption

       Exemption is available to all categories of assessees who derive any profits or
       gains from an undertaking, being a unit, engaged in the manufacturing or
       production of articles or things or provision of any service. Such assessee
       should be an entrepreneur referred to in section 2(j) of the SEZ Act, 2005 i.e.,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.81

       a person who has been granted a letter of approval by the Development
       Commissioner under section 15(9) of the said Act.

(2) Essential conditions to claim exemption

       The exemption shall apply to an undertaking which fulfils the following
       conditions:

       (i) It has begun to manufacture or produce articles or things or provide
               any service in any SEZ during the previous year relevant to A.Y.2006-07
               or any subsequent assessment year but not later than A.Y.2020-21.

                However, in case where letter of approval, required to be issued in
                accordance with the provisions of the SEZ Act, 2005, has been issued
                on or before 31st March, 2020 and the manufacture or production of
                articles or things or providing services has not begun on or before 31st
                March, 2020 then, the date for manufacture or production of articles or
                things or providing services has been extended to
                31st March, 2021 or such other date after 31st March, 2021, as notified
                by the Central Government.

               For e.g. If the SEZ unit has received the necessary approval by 31.3.2020
               and begins manufacture or production of articles or things or providing
               services on or before 31st March, 2021, then it would be deemed to
               have begun manufacture or production of articles or things or
               providing services during the A.Y. 2020-21 and would be eligible for
               exemption under section 10AA. [The Taxation and Other Laws
               (Relaxation of Certain Provisions) Act, 2020]

       (ii) The assessee should furnish in the prescribed form, before the date
               specified in section 44AB i.e., one month prior to the due date for
               furnishing return of income u/s 139(1), the report of a chartered
               accountant certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed.

       (iii) No deduction under section 10AA would be allowed to an assessee
               who does not furnish a return of income on or before the due date
               specified u/s 139(1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.82  INCOME TAX LAW

               Example : An individual, subject to tax audit u/s 44AB, claiming
               deduction u/s 10AA is required to furnish return of income on or before
               31.10.2026 for A.Y. 2026-27 and the report of a chartered accountant
               before 30.9.2026, certifying the deduction claimed u/s 10AA.

       (iv) Deduction under section 10AA would be available to a Unit, if the
               proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services is received in, or
               brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange,
               within a period of 6 months from the end of the previous year or, within
               such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf.

               The export proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services shall
               be deemed to have been received in India where such export turnover
               is credited to a separate account maintained for that purpose by the
               assessee with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve
               Bank of India.

               Meaning of Competent authority ­ Competent authority means RBI
               or such authority as is authorized under any law for the time being in
               force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.

(3) Period for which deduction is available

       The unit of an entrepreneur, which begins to manufacture or produce any
       article or thing or provide any service in a SEZ on or after 1.4.2005, shall be
       allowed a deduction of:

       (i) 100% of the profits and gains derived from the export, of such articles
               or things or from services for a period of 5 consecutive assessment
               years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year
               in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or
               things or provide services, and

       (ii) 50% of such profits and gains for further 5 assessment years.

       (iii) So much of the amount not exceeding 50% of the profit as is debited
               to the profit and loss account of the previous year in respect of which
               the deduction is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be
               called the "Special Economic Zone Re-investment Reserve Account") to
               be created and utilised in the manner laid down under section 10AA(2)
               for next 5 consecutive years.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.83

       However, Explanation below section 10AA(1) clarified that amount of
       deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed from the total income of the
       assessee computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before giving
       effect to the provisions of this section and the deduction under section 10AA
       shall not exceed such total income of the assessee.

       Example :

       An undertaking is set up in a SEZ and begins manufacturing on 15.10.2011.
       The deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed as under:

       (a) 100% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2012-13 to
              A.Y.2016-17.

       (b) 50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2017-18 to A.Y.
              2021-22.

       (c) 50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2022-23 to
              A.Y.2026-27 provided certain conditions are satisfied.

(4) Conditions to be satisfied for claiming deduction for further 5 years
       (after 10 years) [Section 10AA(2)]

       Sub-section (2) provides that the deduction under (3)(iii) above shall be
       allowed only if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-

       (a) the amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment
               Reserve Account is utilised-

               (1) for the purposes of acquiring machinery or plant which is first put
                       to use before the expiry of a period of three years following the
                       previous year in which the reserve was created; and

               (2) until the acquisition of the machinery or plant as aforesaid, for the
                       purposes of the business of the undertaking. However, it should
                       not be utilized for

                       (i) distribution by way of dividends or profits; or

                       (ii) for remittance outside India as profits; or

                       (iii) for the creation of any asset outside India;

       (b) the particulars, as may be specified by the CBDT in this behalf, have
               been furnished by the assessee in respect of machinery or plant. Such
               particulars include details of the new plant/machinery, name and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.84  INCOME TAX LAW

               address of the supplier of the new plant/machinery, date of acquisition
               and date on which new plant/machinery was first put to use. Such
               particulars have to be furnished along with the return of income for the
               assessment year relevant to the previous year in which such plant or
               machinery was first put to use.

(5) Consequences of mis-utilisation/ non-utilisation of reserve [Section
       10AA(3)]

       Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment
       Reserve Account -

       (a) has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub-
               section (2), the amount so utilized shall be deemed to be the profits in
               the year in which the amount was so utilised and charged to tax
               accordingly; or

       (b) has not been utilised before the expiry of the said period of 3 years, the
               amount not so utilised, shall be deemed to be the profits in the year
               immediately following the said period of three years and be charged to
               tax accordingly.

(6) Computation of profits and gains from exports of such undertakings

       The profits derived from export of articles or things or services (including
       computer software) shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the
       business of the undertaking, being the unit, the same proportion as the
       export turnover in respect of such articles or things or services bears to the
       total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking i.e.

                                    Export turnover of Unit SEZ
       Profits of Unit in SEZ x Total turnover of Unit SEZ

       Clarification on issues relating to export of computer software

       Section 10AA provides deduction to assessees who derive any profits and
       gains from export of articles or things or services (including computer
       software) from the year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce
       such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, subject to
       fulfillment of the prescribed conditions. The profits and gains derived from
       the on site development of computer software (including services for
       development of software) outside India shall be deemed to be the profits and
       gains derived from the export of computer software outside India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.85

Meaning of Export turnover: It means the consideration in respect of export
by the undertaking being the unit of articles or things or services received in
India or brought into India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange
within 6 months from the end of the previous year or within such further
period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf.

However, it does not include

- freight

- telecommunication charges

- insurance

attributable to the delivery of the articles or things outside India or expenses
incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services (including computer
software) outside India.

                Clarification on issues relating to deduction of freight,
                telecommunication charges and other expenses from total
                turnover

 "Export turnover", inter alia, does not include freight, telecommunication
 charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things
 outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in rendering
 of services (including computer software) outside India.

 CBDT has, vide circular No. 4/2018, dated 14/08/2018, clarified that freight,
 telecommunication charges and insurance expenses are to be excluded
 both from "export turnover" and "total turnover', while working out
 deduction admissible under section 10AA to the extent they are
 attributable to the delivery of articles or things outside India.

 Similarly, expenses incurred in foreign exchange for rendering services
 outside India are to be excluded from both "export turnover" and "total
 turnover" while computing deduction admissible under section 10AA.

(7) Restriction on other tax benefits

       (i) The business loss under section 72(1) or loss under the head "Capital
               Gains" under section 74(1), in so far as such loss relates to the business
               of the undertaking, being the Unit shall be allowed to be carried forward
               or set off.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.86  INCOME TAX LAW

       (ii) During the period of deduction, depreciation is deemed to have been
               allowed on the assets. Written Down Value shall accordingly be
               reduced.

       (iii) No deduction under section 80-IA and 80-IB7 shall be allowed in
               relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking.

       (iv) Where any goods or services held for the purposes of eligible business
               are transferred to any other business carried on by the assessee, or
               where any goods held for any other business are transferred to the
               eligible business and, in either case, if the consideration for such
               transfer as recorded in the accounts of the eligible business does not
               correspond to the market value thereof, then the profits eligible for
               deduction shall be computed by adopting market value of such goods
               or services on the date of transfer. In case of exceptional difficulty in
               this regard, the profits shall be computed by the Assessing Officer on a
               reasonable basis as he may deem fit. Similarly, where due to the close
               connection between the assessee and the other person or for any other
               reason, it appears to the Assessing Officer that the profits of eligible
               business is increased to more than the ordinary profits, the Assessing
               Officer shall compute the amount of profits of such eligible business on
               a reasonable basis for allowing the deduction.

       (v) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed in relation
               to any specified business eligible for investment-linked deduction
               under section 35AD, no deduction shall be allowed under section 35AD
               in relation to such specified business for the same or any other
               assessment year.

(8) Deduction allowable in case of amalgamation and demerger

       In the event of any undertaking, being the Unit which is entitled to deduction
       under this section, being transferred, before the expiry of the period specified
       in this section, to another undertaking, being the Unit in a scheme of
       amalgamation or demerger, -

       (a) no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the
               amalgamating or the demerged Unit for the previous year in which the
               amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and

7 Deduction under section sections 80-IA and 80-IB are dealt with at Final Level

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                               6.87

       (b) the provisions of this section would apply to the amalgamated or
               resulting Unit, as they would have applied to the amalgamating or the
               demerged Unit had the amalgamation or demerger had not taken place.

ILLUSTRATION 21

Mr. Y furnishes you the following information for the year ended 31.3.2026:

                          Particulars                                  ` (in lacs)
   Total turnover of Unit A located in Special Economic Zone                     100
   Profit of the business of Unit A                                               30
   Export turnover of Unit A received in India in convertible foreign             50
   exchange on or before 30.9.2026
   Total turnover of Unit B located in Domestic Tariff Area (DTA)                200
   Profit of the business of Unit B                                               20

Compute deduction under section 10AA for the A.Y. 2026-27, assuming that Mr. Y
commenced operations in SEZ and DTA in the year 2019-20 and Mr. Y has exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

50% of the profit derived from export of articles or things or services is eligible for
deduction under section 10AA, since F.Y. 2025-26 is the seventh year commencing
from the year of manufacture or production of articles or things or provision of
services by the Unit in SEZ. As per section 10AA(7), the profit derived from export
of articles or things or services shall be the amount which bears to the profits of
the business of the undertaking, being the Unit, the same proportion as the export
turnover in respect of articles or things or services bears to the total turnover of
the business carried on by the undertaking.

Deduction under section 10AA

                                                   Export Turnover of Unit A
= Profit of the business of Unit A x Total Turnover of Unit A x 50%

=  `  30  lakhs  x  50   x  50%  =  `  7.5 lakhs
                    100

Note ­ No deduction under section 10AA is allowable in respect of profits of
business of Unit B located in DTA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.88                   INCOME TAX LAW

LET US RECAPITULATE

Deductions in respect of certain payments

Section Eligible       Eligible Payments                 Permissible Deduction
             Assessee
                                                         Sum paid or deposited,
80C Individual         Contribution to PPF,               subject to a maximum
          or HUF       Payment of LIC premium,
                       etc.                                     of ` 1,50,000
                                                          [Deduction would be
                       Sums paid or deposited in the       available only if the
                       previous year by way of
                                                               individual/HUF
                       - Life insurance premium          exercises the option of

                       - Contribution to PPF/               shifting out of the
                            SPF/RPF and approved            default tax regime
                            superannuation fund
                                                                provided u/s
                       - Repayment of housing                   115BAC(1A)]
                            loan taken from Govt.,
                            bank, LIC, specified
                            employer etc.

                       - Tuition fees to any Indian
                            university, college, school
                            for full-time education of
                            any two children

                       - Term deposit for a fixed
                            period of not less than 5
                            years with schedule bank

                       - Subscription to notified
                            bonds of NABARD

                       - Five year post office time
                            deposit

                       - Senior Citizen's Savings
                            Scheme Account etc.

                       - Contribution by Central
                            Govt. employee to
                            additional account (Tier II
                            A/c) of NPS referred to
                            u/s 80CCD

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                        6.89

80CCC  Individual      Contribution to certain                      Amount paid or
80CCD                  pension funds                            deposited, subject to a

                       Any amount paid or deposited                    maximum of
                       to keep in force a contract for                  ` 1,50,000
                       any annuity plan of LIC of
                       India or any other insurer for            [Deduction would be
                       receiving pension from the                 available only if the
                       fund.                                    individual exercises the
                                                                 option of shifting out

                                                                    of the default tax
                                                                 regime provided u/s

                                                                       115BAC(1A)]

       Individuals     Contribution to Pension                  Employee's
                                                                Contribution/
       employed        Scheme                      of  Central  Individual'
                                                                Contribution
       by         the  Government
                                                                In case of a salaried
       Central Govt    An individual employed by the            individual, deduction of
                                                                own contribution u/s
       or any other    Central Government on or                 80CCD(1) is restricted to
                                                                10% of his salary.
       employer;       after 1.1.2004 or any other
                                                                In any other case,
       Any other       employer or any other                    deduction u/s 80CCD(1)
                                                                is restricted to 20% of
       individual      assessee, being an individual,           gross total income.

       assessee.       who has paid or deposited any

                       amount in his account under a

                       notified pension scheme [to

                       his individual pension account

                       [Tier I A/c] under National

                       Pension Scheme & Atal                    Further,     additional

                       Pension Yojana]                          deduction of upto

                                                                ` 50,000 is available u/s

                                                                80CCD(1B).

                                                                [Deduction      u/s

                                                                80CCD(1)        and

                                                                80CCD(1B) would be

                                                                available only if the

                                                                individual exercises the

                                                                option of shifting out of

                                                                the default tax regime

                                                                provided        u/s

                                                                115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.90              INCOME TAX LAW

                                                   Employer's

                                                   Contribution

                                                   The entire employer's

                                                   contribution would be

                                                   included in the salary of

                                                   the employee. The

                                                   deduction of employer's

                                                   contribution      under

                                                   section 80CCD(2) would

                                                   be restricted to 14% of

                                                   salary, where the

                                                   employer is the Central

                                                   Government or State

                                                   Government; and 10% of

                                                   salary (14% under default

                                                   tax regime), in case of

                                                   any other employer.

                                                   [Deduction           u/s

                                                   80CCD(2) would be

                                                   available irrespective of

                                                   the regime under which

                                                   he pays tax.]

                  Amount paid or deposited in      In case of amount paid
                  the minor's account under the
                  pension scheme by parents or     or deposited in minor's
                  guardian
                                                   account, the deduction

                                                   is available under section

                                                   80CCD(1B). However,

                                                   the aggregate deduction

                                                   under             section

                                                   80CCD(1B)         cannot

                                                   exceed ` 50,000.

Note ­ As per section 80CCE, maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C, 80CCC &
80CCD(1) is ` 1,50,000. However, the limit ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE does
not apply to deduction under section 80CCD(2) and 80CCD(1B).

80CCH Individual  Contribution to Agniveer         Individual'
                  Corpus Fund                      Contribution
                  An individual enrolled in the    Whole of the amount
                  Agnipath Scheme and              paid or deposited

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                           6.91

                    subscribing to the Agniveer                   [Deduction would be
                    Corpus Fund on or after                       available only if the
                    1.11.2022, who has paid or                    individual exercises the
                    deposited any amount in his                   option of shifting out of
                    account in the Agniveer                       the default tax regime
                    Corpus Fund                                   provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

                                                                  Central Government's

                                                                  Contribution

                                                                  The entire Central

                                                                  Government's

                                                                  contribution to the

                                                                  Agniveer Corpus Fund

                                                                  would be included in

                                                                  the salary of the

                                                                  assessee. Thereafter,

                                                                  deduction u/s 80CCH(2)

                                                                  would be available for

                                                                  the same.

                                                                  [Deduction       u/s

                                                                  80CCH(2) would be

                                                                  available irrespective of

                                                                  the regime under which

                                                                  he pays tax]

80D Individual      Medical Insurance Premium
           and HUF  (1) Any premium paid,

                        otherwise than by way of
                        cash, to keep in force an
                        insurance on the health of ­

                    in case of self, spouse                       Maximum ` 25,000
                                                                   (` 50,000, in case
                    an                             and dependent  the individual or his
                                                                   or her spouse is a
                    individual children
                                                                      senior citizen)
                    in case of family member
                    HUF

                    (2) In case of an individual,
                       contribution, otherwise than
                       by way of cash, to CGHS or
                       any other scheme as notified
                       by Central Government.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      6.92        INCOME TAX LAW

                  (3) Any premium paid,                       Maximum ` 25,000
                                                              (` 50,000, in case
                  otherwise than by way of                    either or both of the
                                                              parents are senior
                  cash, to keep in force an                   citizen(s))

                  insurance on the health of

                  parents, whether or not

                  dependent on the individual.

                  Notes:

                  (i) Any amount paid, otherwise              Amount paid subject to

                  than by way of cash, on                     a cap of ` 50,000 (in

                  account of medical                          case one parent is a

                  expenditure incurred on the                 senior citizen, in respect

                  health of the assessee or his               of whom insurance

                  family member or his                        premium is paid, and

                  parent, who is a senior                     the other is a senior

                  citizen and no amount has                   citizen on whom

                  been paid to effect or to                   medical expenditure is

                  keep in force an insurance                  incurred, the total

                  on the health of such                       deduction         cannot

                  person.                                     exceed ` 50,000)

                  (ii) Payment, including cash                Amount paid subject to
                                                              a cap of ` 5,000, in
                  payment, for preventive                     aggregate (subject to
                                                              the overall individual
                  health check up of himself,                 limits of ` 25,000/
                                                              ` 50,000, as the case
                  spouse,                          dependent  may be)

                  children and parents.

                                                              [Deduction would be

                                                              available only if the

                                                              individual/HUF

                                                              exercises the option of

                                                              shifting out of the

                                                              default tax regime

                                                              provided          u/s

                                                              115BAC(1A)]

80DD  Resident    Maintenance                      including  Flat deduction of
      Individual                                              ` 75,000.
      or HUF      medical treatment of a
                                                              In case of severe
                  dependant disabled                          disability (i.e. person
                                                              with 80% or more
                  Any amount incurred for the

                  medical treatment (including

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                                6.93

                         nursing), training and                         disability) the flat
                         rehabilitation of a dependent
                                                                        deduction shall be

                         disabled                                       ` 1,25,000.

                         and / or                                       [Deduction would be

                         Any amount paid or deposited                   available only if the

                         under the scheme framed in                     individual/HUF
                         this behalf by the LIC or any
                         other insurer or Administrator                 exercises the option of

                                                                        shifting out of the

                         or Specified Company and                       default tax regime
                         approved by Board.
                                                                        provided            u/s

                         Meaning of Dependant                           115BAC(1A)]

                             (1)                             (2)
                         In case of                    Dependant

                         An                        Spouse,   children,
                         individual                parents,  brothers,
                                                   sisters

                         A HUF                     Any member

                         Persons mentioned in column (2)

                         should be wholly or mainly
                         dependant on the person
                         mentioned in corresponding

                         column (1) for support and
                         maintenance. Such persons

                         should not have claimed
                         deduction under section 80U in
                         computing total income of that

                         year.

80DDB Resident           Deduction for medical                          Actual sum paid or
             Individual
             or HUF      treatment of specified                         ` 40,000 (` 1,00,000, if
                         diseases or ailments
                                                                        the payment is for

                         Amount paid for specified                      medical treatment of a

                         diseases or ailment                            senior              citizen),

                         Assessee                  Amount spent         whichever is less,
                         An
                         individual                For himself or his   minus

                                                   dependant being      the amount received
                                                                        from the insurance
                                                   spouse, children,    company or reimbursed
                                                                        by the employer.
                                                   parents, brothers

                                                   or sisters wholly

                                                   or        mainly

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      6.94         INCOME TAX LAW

                                                   dependant on the     [Deduction would be
                                                                        available only if the
                                                   individual   for     individual/HUF exercises
                                                                        the option of shifting out
                                                   support      and     of the default tax regime
                                                                        provided under section
                                                   maintenance          115BAC(1A)]

                   A HUF                           For any member

80E   Individual   Interest on loan taken for                           The deduction is
80EE  Individuals  higher education                                     available for interest
                   Interest on loan taken from any                      payment in the initial
                   financial institution or                             assessment year (year
                   approved charitable institution.                     of commencement of
                                                                        interest payment) and
                   Such loan is taken for                               seven assessment years
                   pursuing his higher education                        immediately
                   or higher education of his or                        succeeding the initial
                   her relative i.e., spouse or                         assessment year (or)
                   children of the individual or                        until the interest is paid
                   the student for whom the                             in full by the assessee,
                   individual is the legal                              whichever is earlier.
                   guardian.

                                                                        [Deduction would be

                                                                        available only if the

                                                                        individual exercises the

                                                                        option of shifting out of

                                                                        the default tax regime

                                                                        provided     u/s

                                                                        115BAC(1A)]

                   Deduction for interest on                            Deduction of upto
                                                                        ` 50,000 would be
                   loan borrowed from any                               allowed in respect of
                                                                        interest on loan taken
                   financial                       institution          from a FI.

                   [bank/housing                               finance

                   company (HFC)] for

                   acquisition of residential                           Conditions:

                   house property                                       Loan should be

                                                                        sanctioned   during

                                                                        P.Y.2016-17

                                                                        Loan sanctioned  ` 35
                                                                        lakhs

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                        6.95

                                                   Value of house  ` 50
                                                   lakhs

                                                   The assessee should
                                                   not own any residential
                                                   house on the date of

                                                   sanction of loan.

                                                   [Deduction would be
                                                   available only if the
                                                   individual exercises the

                                                   option of shifting out of

                                                   the default tax regime
                                                   provided under section
                                                   115BAC(1A)]

80EEA Individual  Deduction in respect of          Deduction of upto
                  interest payable on loan         ` 1,50,000 would be
                  taken from a FI (bank or         allowed in respect of
                  HFC) for acquisition of          interest payable on loan
                  residential house property       taken from a FI for
                                                   acquisition of house
                                                   property.

                                                   Conditions:

                                                   · Loan should be

                                                      sanctioned by a FI

                                                      during the period
                                                      between 1st April
                                                      2019 to 31st March

                                                      2022.

                                                   · Stamp Duty Value of
                                                      house  ` 45 lakhs

                                                   · The individual should
                                                      not own any
                                                      residential house on
                                                      the date of sanction
                                                      of loan.

                                                   · The        individual

                                                   should not be

                                                   eligible to claim

                                                   deduction u/s 80EE.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                 6.96  INCOME TAX LAW
80EEB Individual
                                                                  [Deduction would be
 80G All
            assessees                                             available only if the

                                                                  individual exercises the

                                                                  option of shifting out of

                                                                  the default tax regime

                                                                  provided          u/s

                                                                  115BAC(1A)]

                       Deduction in respect of                    Deduction of upto
                       interest payable on loan                   ` 1,50,000 would be
                       taken from a FI (bank or                   allowed in respect of
                       certain NBFCs) for purchase                interest payable on loan
                       of electric vehicle                        taken for purchase of
                                                                  electric vehicle.

                                                                  Loan should be

                                                                  sanctioned by a FI

                                                                  during the period from

                                                                  1.4.2019 to 31.3.2023.

                                                                  [Deduction would be

                                                                  available only if the

                                                                  individual exercises the

                                                                  option of shifting out of

                                                                  the default tax regime

                                                                  provided          u/s

                                                                  115BAC(1A)]

                       Donations to certain funds, charitable institutions etc.

                       There are four categories of deductions ­

                                                   Category                  Donee

                       (I) 100% deduction Prime Minister's National

                       of                          amount Relief Fund, National

                       donated, without Children's Fund, Swachh

                       any qualifying Bharat Kosh, National

                       limit                                      Defence Fund, PM CARES

                                                                  Fund etc.

                       (II) 50% deduction of Prime Minister's Drought

                       amount donated, Relief Fund.

                       without                               any

                       qualifying limit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                6.97

(III) 100% deduction of Government or local

amount donated, authority, institution for

subject                                            to promotion of family

qualifying limit                                   planning etc.

(IV) 50% deduction of Government or any local

amount donated, authority to be used for

subject                                            to charitable purpose, other

qualifying limit. than promotion of family

                                                   planning, notified temple,

                                                   church, gurudwara, mosque

                                                   etc.

Calculation of Qualifying limit for Category III & IV
donations:

Step 1: Compute adjusted total income, i.e., the gross
total income as reduced by the following:

1. Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except u/s 80G

2. Short term capital gains taxable u/s 111A

3. Long term capital gains taxable u/s 112 & 112A

Step 2: Calculate 10% of adjusted total income.

Step 3: Calculate the actual donation, which is subject to
qualifying limit

Step 4: Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum
permissible deduction.

Step 5: The said deduction is adjusted first against
donations qualifying for 100% deduction (i.e., Category
III donations). Thereafter, 50% of balance qualifies for
deduction under section 80G.

Note - No deduction shall be allowed for donation in

excess of ` 2,000, if paid in cash.

[In case of individuals, HUF, AoP (other than a co-

operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical person,
deduction would be available only if they exercise the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            6.98       INCOME TAX LAW

80GG   Individual      Rent paid for residential               Least of the following is
80GGA                  accommodation                           allowable as deduction:
       not         in

       receipt of                                              (1) 25% of total income;

       house rent                                              (2) Rent paid ­ 10% of
                                                                   total income
       allowance

                                                               (3) ` 5,000 p.m.

                                                               No deduction if any

                                                               residential

                                                               accommodation     is

                                                               owned         by  the

                                                               assessee/his

                                                               spouse/minor

                                                               child/HUF at the place

                                                               where he ordinarily

                                                               resides or performs the

                                                               duties of his office or

                                                               employment or carries

                                                               on his business or

                                                               profession.

                                                               [Deduction would be
                                                               available only if the
                                                               individual exercises the
                                                               option of shifting out of
                                                               the default tax regime
                                                               provided under section
                                                               115BAC(1A)]

       Any assessee    Donations for scientific                Actual donation
       not having
       income          research                    and  rural  [No deduction shall be
       chargeable                                              allowed for donation in
       under the       development                             excess of ` 2,000, if paid
       head "Profits                                           in cash]
       and gains of
       business or                                             [Deduction would be
       profession"                                             available to individual,
                                                               HUF, AoP (other than a
                                                               co-operative society) or
                                                               BoI or an artificial
                                                               juridical person only if
                                                               they exercise the option
                                                               of shifting out of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                       6.99

                                                               default tax     regime
                                                               provided             u/s
                                                               115BAC(1A)]

80GGB   Indian             Contributions to political          Actual contribution
        company            parties                             (otherwise than by way
                           Any sum contributed by it to a      of cash)
        (not opting        registered political party or an
        for section        electoral trust.
        115BAA/
        115BAB)

80GGC   Any person,        Contributions to political          Actual contribution
                           parties
        other than                                             (otherwise than by way
                           Amount contributed to a
        local              registered political party or an    of cash)
                           electoral trust.
        authority                                              [An individual, HUF, AoP

        and            an                                      (other than a co-

        artificial                                             operative society) or BoI

        juridical                                              would be eligible for

        person                                                 deduction u/s 80GGC

        funded by                                              only if the assessee

        the                                                    exercise the option of

        Government.                                            shifting out of the

                                                               default tax regime

                                                               provided             u/s

                                                               115BAC(1A)]

Deductions in respect of Certain Incomes

As per section 80AC, furnishing return of income on or before due date is
mandatory for claiming deduction in respect of certain incomes.

Section Eligible           Eligible Income                     Permissible Deduction
             Assessee

80JJAA  An assessee        Deduction in            respect of  30% of additional
        to whom            employment                          employee cost incurred
        section            employees               of  new     in the previous year.
        44AB
        applies,                                               Deduction is allowable
        whose                                                  for 3 assessment years
        Gross total                                            including assessment
        income                                                 year relevant to the
        includes                                               previous year in which
        profits and                                            such employment is
                                                               provided.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       6.100           INCOME TAX LAW

       gains                                             [Deduction would be
       derived                                           available irrespective of
       from                                              the regime under which
       business                                          the employer pays tax]

80QQB  Resident        Royalty income, etc., of          Income derived in the
80RRB  individual,     authors of certain books          exercise of profession
       being an        other than text books             or ` 3,00,000, whichever
       author          Consideration for assignment      is less.
                       or grant of any of his interests
                       in the copyright of any book,     In respect of royalty or
                       being a work of literary,
                       artistic or scientific nature or  copyright fee received
                       royalty or copyright fee          otherwise than by way
                       received as lumpsum or            of lumpsum, income to
                       otherwise.                        be restricted to 15% of
                                                         value of books sold
                       Royalty on patents                during the relevant
                       Any income by way of royalty      previous year.
                       on patents registered on or
                       after 1.4.2003                    [Deduction would be
                                                         available only if the
                                                         individual exercises the

                                                         option of shifting out of
                                                         the default tax regime

                                                         provided under section
                                                         115BAC(1A)]

       Resident                                          Whole of such income
                                                         or ` 3,00,000, whichever
       individual,                                       is less.

       being        a

       patentee                                          [Deduction would be

                                                         available only if the

                                                         individual exercises the

                                                         option of shifting out of

                                                         the default tax regime

                                                         provided     u/s

                                                         115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                          6.101

Deductions in respect of Other Income

Section Eligible           Eligible Income                       Permissible Deduction
             Assessee

80TTA  Individual          Interest on deposits in               Actual interest subject to
       or a HUF,           savings account
       other than a                                              a  maximum        of
       resident            Interest on deposits in a
       senior              savings account with a bank, a        ` 10,000.
       citizen             co-operative society or a post
                           office (not being time deposits,      [Deduction would be
                           which are repayable on expiry         available only if the
                           of fixed periods)                     individual/HUF exercises
                                                                 the option of shifting out
                                                                 of the default tax regime
                                                                 provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

80TTB  Resident            Interest on deposits                  Actual interest or
                                                                 ` 50,000, whichever is
       senior citizen      Interest on deposits (both            less.

       (i.e.           an  fixed deposits and saving

       individual of       accounts) with banking                [Deduction would be
                                                                 available only if the
       the age of 60       company,                co-operative  individual exercises the
                                                                 option of shifting out of
       years or more       society engaged in the                the default tax regime
                                                                 provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]
       at any time         business of banking or a post

       during the          office.

       previous year)

Other Deductions

Section Eligible           Condition for deduction               Permissible Deduction
             Assessee
                                                                 Flat deduction of
80U Resident               Deduction in case of a                ` 75,000, in case of a
           Individual      person with disability                person with disability.
                           Any person, who is certified by       Flat deduction of
                           the medical authority to be a         ` 1,25,000, in case of a
                           person with disability.               person with severe
                                                                 disability (80% or more
                                                                 disability).
                                                                 [Deduction would be
                                                                 available only if the
                                                                 individual exercises the
                                                                 option of shifting out of
                                                                 the default tax regime
                                                                 provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    6.102              INCOME TAX LAW

Deduction under section 10AA

Section Eligible       Eligible Income                      Permissible Deduction
             Assessee

10AA An assessee Profits derived from exports of            Deduction for 15
            who derives such articles or things or export   consecutive assessment
                                                            years
profits from of services (including computer                Amount of deduction =
                                                            Profits of Unit in SEZ x
an under-              software).

taking,                Conditions for deduction

being a Unit           1. Proceeds to be received in        Export turnover of Unit SEZ

established            convertible                 foreign  Total turnover of Unit SEZ

in       SEZ,          exchange within 6 months             Years 1 to 5 - 100% of

which                  from the end of the P.Y. or          such profits would be

begins to              such further period as the           exempt in the first five

manufacture            competent                            years;

or produce             authority may allow in this          Years 6 to 10 - 50% of

articles or            behalf.                              such profits in the next

things or              2. The report of chartered           five years; and

provide any            accountant certifying that

service on             the deduction has been               Years 11 to 15 - In the

or       after         correctly claimed should be          last five years, 50% of

1.4.2005 but           furnished before the date            such

before                 specified in section 44AB.           profits subject to

1.4.2021               3. Return of income to be            transfer to SEZ Re-

                       filed on or before due date          investment Reserve

                       u/s 139(1).                          Account.

                                                            [In case of individuals,

                                                            HUF, AoP (other than a

                                                            co-operative society),

                                                            BoI or an artificial

                                                            juridical        person,

                                                            deduction would be

                                                            available only if they

                                                            exercise the option of

                                                            shifting out of the

                                                            default tax regime

                                                            provided         u/s

                                                            115BAC(1A)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.103

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Prakash is retired Government Officer aged 65 years, resides in Cochin, derived
       following income:

Pension                                                   `
Interest from bank on fixed deposits (Gross)       6,60,000
                                                   55,000

       Compute the total income of Mr. Prakash for the assessment year 2026-27
       under normal provisions of the Act from the following particulars:

       (i) Life insurance premium paid by cheque ` 22,500 for insurance of his life.
               The insurance policy was taken on 08-09-2019 and the sum assured is
              ` 2,00,000.

       (ii) Premium of ` 26,000 paid by cheque for health insurance of self and his
               wife.

       (iii) ` 1,500 paid in cash for his health check-up and ` 4,500 paid through
               cheque for preventive health check-up of his parents, who are senior
               citizens.

       (iv) Paid interest of ` 6,500 on loan taken from bank for MBA course pursued
               by his daughter.

       (v) A sum of ` 15,000 donated in cash to an institution approved for the
               purpose of section 80G for promoting family planning.

2. Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-
       tax Act, 1961:

       (i) During the financial year 2025-26, Mr. Amit paid interest on loan availed
               by him for his son's higher education. His son is already employed in a
               firm. Mr. Amit will get the deduction under section 80E.

       (ii) Subscription to notified bonds of NABARD would qualify for deduction
               under section 80C.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.104  INCOME TAX LAW

       (iii) In order to be eligible to claim deduction under section 80C, investment/
               contribution/ subscription etc. in eligible or approved modes, should be
               made from out of income chargeable to tax.

       (iv) Where an individual repays a sum of ` 30,000 towards principal and
               ` 14,000 as interest in respect of loan taken from a bank for pursuing
               eligible higher studies, the deduction allowable under section 80E is
               ` 44,000 irrespective of the tax regime.

       (v) Mrs. Sheela, widow of Mr. Satish (who was an employee of M/s. XYZ Ltd.),
               received ` 7 lakhs on 1.5.2025, being amount standing to the credit of
               Mr. Satish in his NPS Account, in respect of which deduction has been
               allowed under section 80CCD to Mr. Satish in the earlier previous years.
               Such amount received by her as a nominee on closure of the account is
               deemed to be her income for A.Y.2026-27.

       (vi) Mr. Vishal, a Central Government employee, contributed ` 50,000
               towards Tier II account of NPS. The same would be eligible for deduction
               under section 80CCD. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the
               default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

3. Examine the allowability of the following if the assessees have exercised the
       option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
       115BAC(1A):

       (i) Rajan, a resident individual, has to pay to a hospital for treatment
               ` 62,000 and spent nothing for life insurance or for maintenance of
               dependent disabled.

       (ii) Varun, a resident Indian, has spent nothing for treatment in the previous
               year and deposited ` 25,000 with LIC for maintenance of dependant
               disabled.

       (iii) Hari, a resident individual, has incurred ` 20,000 for treatment and
               ` 25,000 was deposited with LIC for maintenance of dependant disabled.

4. Ms. Jyoti purchased a house property costing ` 42 lakhs on 1st May, 2021. The
       property is used exclusively for her residential purpose. For this purpose, she
       obtained loan from DHFL of ` 35 lakhs bearing interest @ 14% p.a. on
       1st April, 2021. She does not own any other house.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.105

       State with brief reasons the deductions that can be claimed by Ms. Jyoti in
       respect of interest on loan for Assessment Year 2026-27 if she has opted out of
       the default tax regime. No repayment of loan has been made so far.

5. For the A.Y. 2026-27, the Gross total income of Mr. Chaturvedi, a resident in
       India, was ` 15,18,240 which includes long-term capital gain of ` 2,45,000
       taxable under section 112 and Short-term capital gain of ` 58,000. The Gross
       total income also includes interest income of ` 12,000 from savings bank
       deposits with banks and ` 40,000 interest on fixed deposits with banks.
       Mr. Chaturvedi has invested in PPF ` 1,20,000 and also paid a medical
       insurance premium ` 51,000. Mr. Chaturvedi also contributed ` 50,000 to
       Public Charitable Trust eligible for deduction under section 80G by way of an
       account payee cheque. Compute the total income and tax thereon of
       Mr. Chaturvedi, who is 70 years old as on 31.3.2026, in a tax efficient manner.

6. Mr. Rajmohan whose gross total income was ` 6,40,000 for the financial year
       2025-26, furnishes you the following information:

       (i) Repayment of loan taken from SBI for acquisition of residential house
              (self-occupied) - ` 50,000.

       (ii) Five year post office time deposit - ` 20,000.

       (iii) Donation to a recognized charitable trust ` 25,000 which is eligible for
               deduction under section 80G at the applicable rate.

       (iv) Interest on loan taken for higher education of spouse paid during the year
              - ` 10,000.

       Compute the total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y. 2026-27 if he has
       exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
       section 115BAC(1A).

7. Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y. 2026-27 of
       Ms. Roma, aged 40 years, who has a gross total income of ` 15,00,000 for the
       A.Y. 2026-27 and has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
       regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). She provides the following
       information about her investments/payments during the P.Y. 2025-26:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     6.106           INCOME TAX LAW

Sl.                                                Particulars      Amount

No.                                                                 (` )

1. Life Insurance premium paid (Policy taken on                     35,000
       31-03-2012 and sum assured is ` 4,70,000)

2. Public Provident Fund contribution                               1,50,000

3. Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila Bank,               20,000
        Bangalore

4. Payment to L.I.C. Pension Fund                                   1,40,000

5. Mediclaim Policy taken for self, wife and dependent              30,000
        children, premium paid by cheque

6. Medical Insurance premium paid by cheque for                     52,000
        parents (Senior Citizens)

8. Mr. Rudra has one unit at Special Economic Zone (SEZ) and other unit at
       Domestic Tariff Area (DTA). He provides the following details for the previous
       year 2025-26.

        Particulars                                Mr. Rudra (`)    Unit in DTA (`)
Total Sales                                           6,00,00,000         2,00,00,000
Export Sales                                          5,60,00,000         1,60,00,000
Net Profit                                               80,00,000          20,00,000

Proceeds from export sales in SEZ received in convertible foreign exchange by
30.9.2026 is ` 3,00,00,000. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Calculate the eligible
deduction under section 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961, for the Assessment
Year 2026-27 if both the units were set up and start manufacturing from
22-05-2016.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                        6.107

    ANSWERS

1.  Computation of total income of Mr. Prakash for A.Y.2026-27

                        Particulars                     `       `           `
                                                    6,60,000
    Income under the head "Salaries"                          20,000    6,10,000
    Pension                                           50,000  31,000       55,000

    Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)               26,000   6,500    6,65,000
    Lower of ` 50,000 or actual salary/ pension        5,000       Nil

    Income from Other Sources
    Interest from bank on fixed deposit
    (Gross)

    Gross Total Income
    Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A
    Deduction under section 80C
    LIC premium of ` 22,500 (restricted to 10%
    of ` 2,00,000, being the sum assured, as the
    policy is taken after 31.3.2012)

    Deduction under section 80D
    Premium for health insurance for self and
    his wife paid by cheque, allowed upto
    ` 50,000 since Mr. Prakash is a senior citizen
    Preventive health check-up for self, ` 1,500,
    and for his parents, ` 4,500, restricted to
    ` 5,000 (deduction allowed even if the same
    is paid in cash)

    Deduction under section 80E

    Interest on loan taken from bank for MBA
    course pursued by his daughter

    Deduction under section 80G

    Donation to an approved institution for
    promoting family planning not allowed
    since the amount exceeding ` 2,000 is paid
    in cash

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.108  INCOME TAX LAW

Deduction under section 80TTB                      50,000 1,07,500
Interest on fixed deposit with bank                             5,57,500
allowable as deduction upto ` 50,000, since
Mr. Prakash is a senior citizen

Total Income

2. (i) The statement is correct. The deduction under section 80E is available
               to an individual in respect of interest on loan taken for his higher
               education or for the higher education of his relative only if he exercises
               the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
               section 115BAC(1A). For this purpose, relative means, inter alia, spouse
               and children of the individual. Therefore, Mr. Amit will get the deduction
               under section 80E in respect of interest on loan availed by him for his
               son's higher education, if he exercises the option of shifting out of the
               default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is immaterial
               that his son is already employed in a firm. This would not affect
               Mr. Amit's eligibility for deduction under section 80E.

(ii) The statement is correct. Under section 80C(2) subscription to such
       bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government may notify in the
       Official Gazette) would qualify for deduction under section 80C, if the
       assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
       regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(iii) The statement is not correct. There is no stipulation under section 80C
       that the investment, subscription, etc. should be made from out of
       income chargeable to tax.

(iv) The statement is not correct. An individual would not be eligible for
       deduction u/s 80E if he pays tax under default tax regime under section
       115BAC. If he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
       regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), deduction under section
       80E would be available in respect of interest paid on education loan.
       Hence, the deduction will be limited to interest of ` 14,000, if he has
       exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
       under section 115BAC(1A).

(v) The statement is not correct. The proviso to section 80CCD(3)
       provides that the amount received by the nominee, on closure of NPS
       account on the death of the assessee, shall not be deemed to be the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                 6.109

income of the nominee. Hence, amount received by Mrs. Sheela would
not be deemed to be her income for A.Y. 2026-27.

(vi) The statement is not correct. Contribution to Tier II account of NPS
       would qualify for deduction under section 80C and not section 80CCD.

3. (i) The deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD is allowable to Rajan,
               irrespective of the amount of expenditure incurred or paid by him. If
               the expenditure is incurred in respect of a dependant with severe
               disability, the deduction allowable is ` 1,25,000.

(ii) The assessee Varun has deposited ` 25,000 for maintenance of
       dependent disabled. He is, however, eligible to claim ` 75,000 since the
       deduction of ` 75,000 is allowed, irrespective of the amount deposited
       with LIC. In the case of dependant with severe disability, the deduction
       allowable is ` 1,25,000.

(iii) Section 80DD allows a deduction of ` 75,000 irrespective of the actual
       amount spent on maintenance of a dependent disabled and/or actual
       amount deposited with LIC. Therefore, the deduction will be ` 75,000
       even though the total amount incurred/deposited is only ` 45,000. If
       the dependant is a person with severe disability the quantum of
       deduction is ` 1,25,000.

4. Ms. Jyoti can claim the following deductions for the A.Y. 2026-27 in respect
       of the interest of ` 4,90,000 (` 35,00,000 x 14%) payable on loan taken for
       acquisition of residential house property for self-occupation:

Deduction under section 24 while computing income under            2,00,000
the head "Income from house property":                             1,50,000

Interest on housing loan taken for acquisition of residential
house property for self-occupation, would be eligible for
deduction under section 24 while computing income from
house property, subject to a maximum of ` 2,00,000

Deduction under section 80EEA (while computing
deduction under Chapter VI-A from gross total income):

Interest payable on housing loan taken by Ms. Jyoti qualifies for
deduction under section 80EEA, subject to a maximum of
` 1,50,000, since ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    6.110                INCOME TAX LAW

        (i) The loan is sanctioned by the Financial Institution
                  between 1.4.2019 to 31.3.2022

        (ii) Stamp duty value of the house (` 42 lakhs) does not
                  exceed ` 45 lakhs

        (iii) She is not eligible to claim deduction u/s 80EE
        (iv) She does not own any residential house on the date

                  of sanction of loan

    Therefore, out of the interest of ` 4,90,000, ` 2 lakhs is allowable as
    deduction under section 24; and out of the balance of ` 2,90,000, ` 1,50,000
    is allowable as deduction under section 80EEA from gross total income.

5.  Computation of total income and tax liability of

    Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2026-27 under default tax regime

                         Particulars                              `

    Gross total income incl. long term capital gain         15,18,240
    Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
                                                                         -

    No deduction would be available under default tax
    regime u/s 115BAC

    Total income                                            15,18,240

    Tax on total income

    LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 12.5%                                       30,625

    Balance total income ` 12,73,240                              70,986

                                                            1,01,611

    Add: Health and Education cess @4%                            4,064

    Total tax liability                                     1,05,675

    Total tax liability (Rounded off)                       1,05,680

    Computation of total income and tax liability of

    Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2026-27 under the optional tax regime

                  (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)

                         Particulars                   `          `

    Gross total income incl. long term capital gain         15,18,240

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                             6.111

Less: Long term capital gain                                             2,45,000

                                                                         12,73,240

Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A

Under section 80C in respect of PPF deposit                    1,20,000

Under section 80D (it is assumed that premium of               50,000
` 51,000 is paid by otherwise than by cash. The
deduction would be restricted to ` 50,000, since
Mr. Chaturvedi is a senior citizen)

Under section 80G (See Notes 1 & 2 below)                      25,000    2,45,000
Under section 80TTB (See Note 3 below)                         50,000

Total income         (excluding                    long  term            10,28,240
capital gains)

Total income         (including                    long  term            12,73,240
capital gains)

Tax on total income (including long-term
capital gains of ` 2,45,000)

LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 12.5%                                                  30,625

Balance total income ` 10,28,240 (See Note 4                             1,18,472
below)

                                                                         1,49,097

Add: Health and Education cess @4%                                       5,964

Total tax liability                                                      1,55,061

Total tax liability (Rounded off)                                        1,55,060

Since the tax liability is lower under the default tax regime as compared to
the optional tax regime, Mr. Chaturvedi should not exercise the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        6.112  INCOME TAX LAW

Notes:

1. Computation of deduction under section 80G:

                                                   Particulars          `

        Gross total income (excluding long term capital gains) 12,73,240

        Less: Deduction under section 80C, 80D & 80TTB                  2,20,000

                                                                        10,53,240

        10% of the above                                                1,05,324

        Contribution made                                               50,000

        Lower of the two eligible for deduction under section           50,000

        Deduction under section 80G ­ 50% of ` 50,000                   25,000

2. Deduction under section 80G is allowed only if amount is paid by any
       mode other than cash, in case of amount exceeding ` 2,000. Therefore,
       the contribution made to public charitable trust is eligible for deduction
       since it is made by way of an account payee cheque.

3. Deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80TTB is allowed to a senior
       citizen if gross total income includes interest income on bank deposits,
       both fixed deposits and savings account.

4. Mr. Chaturvedi, being a senior citizen is eligible for a higher basic
       exemption of ` 3,00,000.

6. Computation of total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y.2026-27

                           Particulars                          `       `
Gross Total Income
Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A                                      6,40,000

         Under section 80C                                      50,000
         Repayment of loan taken for acquisition of             20,000
         residential house                                      70,000
         Five year time deposit with Post Office
                                                                10,000
         Under section 80E
         Interest on loan taken for higher education of
         spouse, being a relative.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                      6.113

             Under section 80G (See Note below)             12,500 92,500
             Donation to recognized charitable trust                    5,47,500
             (50% of ` 25,000)
    Total Income

    Note: In case of deduction under section 80G in respect of donation to a
    charitable trust, the net qualifying amount has to be restricted to 10% of adjusted
    total income, i.e., gross total income less deductions under Chapter VI-A except
    80G. The adjusted total income is, therefore, ` 5,60,000 (i.e. 6,40,000 ­ ` 80,000),
    10% of which is ` 56,000, which is higher than the actual donation of ` 25,000.
    Therefore, the deduction under section 80G would be ` 12,500, being 50% of the
    actual donation of ` 25,000.

7.  Computation of eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A of

    Ms. Roma for A.Y. 2026-27

                               Particulars                       `         `
    Deduction under section 80C                                35,000  1,50,000
    Life insurance premium paid ` 35,000
    (allowed in full since the same is within the limit of  1,50,000
    20% of the sum assured, the policy being taken             20,000
    before 1.4.2012)
    Public Provident Fund                                   2,05,000
    Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila            1,50,000
    Bank, Bangalore                                         1,40,000
                                                            2,90,000
    Restricted to a maximum of ` 1,50,000
    Deduction under section 80CCC for payment                  25,000
    towards LIC pension fund

    As per section 80CCE, aggregate deduction under,
    inter alia, section 80C and 80CCC, is restricted to
    Deduction under section 80D
    Payment of medical insurance premium of ` 30,000
    towards medical policy taken for self, wife and
    dependent children restricted to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.114       INCOME TAX LAW

Medical insurance premium paid ` 52,000 for        50,000 75,000
parents, being senior citizens, restricted to                  2,25,000

Eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A

8. Computation of deduction u/s 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961

       As per section 10AA, in computing the total income of Mr. Rudra from his
       unit located in a Special Economic Zone (SEZ), which begins to manufacture
       or produce articles or things or provide any services during the previous year
       relevant to the assessment year commencing on or after 01.04.2006 but
       before 01.04.2021, there shall be allowed a deduction of 100% of the profit
       and gains derived from export of such articles or things or from services for
       a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment
       year relevant to the previous year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or
       produce such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, and
       50% of such profits for further five assessment years.

       Since Mr. Rudra has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
       regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), he would be eligible for
       deduction u/s 10AA.

       The deduction u/s 10AA would be available only if Mr. Rudra furnishes report
       of chartered accountant before the date specified in section 44AB and files
       return of income on or before due date u/s 139(1).

       Since A.Y. 2026-27 is the 10th assessment year from A.Y. 2017-18, relevant
       to the previous year 2016-17, in which the SEZ unit began manufacturing of
       articles or things, it shall be eligible for deduction of 50% of the profits
       derived from export of such articles or things, assuming all the other
       conditions specified in section 10AA are fulfilled.

                                                     Export turnover of Unit in SEZ x 50%
             = Profits of Unit in SEZ x Total turnover of Unit in SEZ

                 300 lakhs x 50%                   = ` 22.50 lakhs
            x 400 lakhs
= 60 lakhs

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME                                    6.115

Export turnover of Unit in SEZ is the export sales in SEZ received in
convertible foreign exchange by 30.9.2026 which is ` 3,00,00,000.

The unit set up in Domestic Tariff Area is not eligible for the benefit of
deduction u/s 10AA in respect of its export profits, in both the situations.

Working Note:

  Computation of total sales, export sales and net profit of unit in SEZ

Particulars   Rudra Ltd. (`)                       Unit in DTA (`)    Unit in SEZ (`)
Total Sales       6,00,00,000                            2,00,00,000     4,00,00,000
Export Sales      4,60,00,000                            1,60,00,000     3,00,00,000
Net Profit          80,00,000                              20,00,000        60,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
