CHAPTER  a  7

ADVANCE TAX, TAX
DEDUCTION AT SOURCE
AND TAX COLLECTION
AT SOURCE

                                     LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to­
 appreciate the modes of recovery of income-tax from an

      assessee;

 comprehend and apply the provisions governing deduction
      of tax at source from certain specified income and
      payments;

 examine whether tax is deductible in a particular case(s)
      considering the provisions of the relevant section;

 compute the tax deductible at source in respect of a
      particular case(s);

 identify the cases where tax is not required to be deducted
      at source and the conditions to be satisfied for this purpose;

 comprehend and appreciate the duty of the person
      deducting tax;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.2  INCOME TAX LAW

 examine the consequences of failure to deduct tax at
      source or make payment of the tax deducted at source;

 appreciate when the liability to pay advance tax arises;

 compute advance tax liability and the schedule of
      instalments for payment of advance tax;

 comprehend the concept of tax collection at source and
      appreciate when tax is collectible at source;

 appreciate the difference between tax deduction at source
      and tax collection at source.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                      ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS     a  7.3             a

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

Tax deduction         Advance Tax                  Tax collection
   at source                                          at source

Deduction of tax at      Liability to pay          Collection of tax
        source             advance tax                 at source

[Section 192 to 196]  [Section 207 to 208]          [Section 206C]

    Certificate of       Computation of              TCS for non-
deduction of tax at        advance tax               furnishers of
                           [Section 209]             PAN [Section
     a lower rate
    [Section 197]         Instalments of                 206CC]
                      advance tax and due
No deduction of tax                                    Difference
   in certain cases             dates                between TDS
   [Section 197A]          [Section 211]
                                                        and TCS
   Miscellaneous       Credit for advance
      Provisions                  tax                  Common
                                                   Number for TDS
   [Section 198 to         [Section 219]
        206AA]                                          and TCS
                          Interest on non-          [Section 203A]
                          payment / short
                      payment or deferment
                           of advance tax
                      [Section 234B & 234C]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.4  INCOME TAX LAW

    1. DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE AND
          ADVANCE PAYMENT [SECTION 190]

The total income of an assessee for the previous year is taxable in the relevant
assessment year. For example, the total income for the P.Y. 2025-26 is taxable in
the A.Y. 2026-27. However, income-tax is recovered from the assessee in the
previous year itself through ­

(1) Tax deduction at source (TDS)

(2) Tax collection at source (TCS)

(3) Payment of advance tax

Another mode of recovery of tax is from the employer through tax paid by him
under section 192(1A) on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the
employee.

These taxes are deductible from the total tax due from the assessee. The assessee,
while filing his return of income, has to pay self-assessment tax under section
140A, if tax is due on the total income as per his return of income after adjusting,
inter alia, TDS, TCS, relief of tax claimed under section 89, tax credit claimed to be
set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A), any tax or interest payable according to the provisions of
section 191(2) and advance tax.

    2. DIRECT PAYMENT [SECTION 191]

Direct payment of tax - Section 191(1) provides that in the following cases, tax is
payable by the assessee directly ­

(i) in the case of income in respect of which tax is not required to be deducted
       at source; and

(ii) income in respect of which tax is liable to be deducted but is not actually
       deducted.

In view of this provision, the proceedings for recovery of tax necessarily had to be
taken against the assessee whose tax was liable to be deducted, but not
deducted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.5  a

In order to overcome this difficulty, the Explanation to this section provides that if
any person, including the principal officer of a company ­

(i) who is required to deduct tax at source; or

(ii) an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section 192(1A),

does not deduct, or after deducting fails to pay such tax, or does not pay, the
whole or part of the tax, then, such person shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-
default.

However, if the assessee himself has paid the tax, this provision will not apply.

    3. DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE

3.1 Salary [Section 192]

(1) Applicability of TDS under section 192

       This section casts an obligation on every person responsible for paying any
       income chargeable to tax under the head `Salaries' to deduct income-tax at
       the time of payment on the amount payable.

(2) Manner of deduction of tax

       (i) Such income-tax has to be calculated at the average rate of income-
               tax computed on the basis of the rates in force for the relevant
               financial year in which the payment is made, on the estimated total
               income of the assessee where the employee intimates to the employer
               his intent to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax
               regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

       (ii) Average rate of income-tax means the rate arrived at by dividing the
               amount of income-tax calculated on the total income, by such total
               income.

       (iii) A deductor, being an employer, has to seek information from each of
               its employees having income under section 192 regarding their
               intended tax regime and each such employee would intimate the
               same to the deductor, being his employer, regarding his intended tax
               regime for each year and upon intimation, the deductor has to
               compute his total income, and deduct tax at source thereon according
               to the option exercised.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.6             INCOME TAX LAW

   If intimation is not made by the employee, it would be presumed that
   the employee continues to be in the default tax regime u/s 115BAC
   and has not exercised the option to opt out of the default tax regime.
   Accordingly, in such a case, the employer has to deduct tax at source,
   on income under section 192, in accordance with the rates provided
   under section 115BAC(1A).

   It is also clarified that the intimation would not amount to exercising
   option under section 115BAC(6) and the person shall be required to
   do so separately in accordance with the provisions of that section
   [Circular No. 4/2023 dated 5.4.2023].

(iv) The concept of payment of tax on non-monetary perquisites has been
       provided in sections 192(1A) and (1B). These sections provide that the
       employer may pay this tax, at his option, in lieu of deduction of tax at
       source from salary payable to the employee. Such tax will have to be
       worked out at the average rate applicable to aggregate salary income
       of the employee and payment of tax will have to be made every
       month along with tax deducted at source on monetary payment of
       salary, allowances etc.

   ILLUSTRATION 1

   Mr. A, the employer, pays gross salary including allowances and
   monetary perquisites amounting to ` 7,30,000 to his General Manager.
   Besides, the employer provides non-monetary perquisites to him
   whose value is estimated at ` 1,20,000. The General Manager is
   exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax
   under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.
   What is the tax implication in the hands of Mr. A, the employer and
   General Manager, the employee?

   SOLUTION
                                                                                                   `

   Gross salary, allowances and monetary perquisites  7,30,000

   Non-Monetary perquisites                           1,20,000

                                                      8,50,000

   Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)      50,000

                                                      8,00,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS            a  7.7  a

Tax Liability                                              75,400

Average rate of tax (` 75,400 / ` 8,00,000 × 100)          9.425%

Mr. A can deduct ` 75,400 at source from the salary of the General
Manager at the time of payment.

Alternatively, Mr. A can pay tax on non-monetary perquisites as under ­

Tax on non-monetary perquisites = 9.425% of ` 1,20,000 = ` 11,310

Balance to be deducted from salary = ` 64,090

If Mr. A pays tax of ` 11,310 on non-monetary perquisites, the same is
not a deductible expenditure as per section 40(a). The amount of tax
paid towards non-monetary perquisite by the employer, however, is
not chargeable to tax in the hands of the employee as per section
10(10CC).

(v) In cases where an assessee is employed simultaneously under more
       than one employer or the assessee takes up a job with another
       employer during the financial year after his resignation or retirement
       from the services of the former employer, he may furnish the details of
       the income under the head "Salaries" due or received by him from the
       other employer, the tax deducted therefrom and such other particulars
       to his current employer. Thereupon, the subsequent employer should
       take such information into consideration and then deduct the tax
       remaining payable in respect of the employee's remuneration from
       both the employers put together for the relevant financial year.

(vi) In respect of salary payments to employees of Government or to
       employees of companies, co-operative societies, local authorities,
       universities, institutions, associations or bodies, deduction of tax at
       source should be made after allowing relief u/s 89, where eligible.

(vii) An employee can inform his employer for a financial year, the details
       of the following:

(a) such other income chargeable to tax (not being a loss under any
       such head;

(b) any tax deducted or collected under any other provision of the
       Act; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.8  INCOME TAX LAW

               (c) loss, if any, under the head "Income from house property" if the
                       assessee intimated to the employer his intent to exercise the
                       option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
                       section 115BAC(1A),

               in prescribed form and manner and thereupon the person responsible
               to deduct tax shall take into account the above particulars while
               calculating tax deductible at source.

               However, it has to be noted that on account of submission of the
               above details, the tax deducted at source on salaries should not be
               reduced except with respect to loss from house property (allowable to
               the extent of ` 2,00,000) and tax deducted at source and tax collected
               at source.

(3) Furnishing of statement of particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of
       salary by employer to employee

       The employer shall furnish to the employee, a statement in Form No. 12BA
       giving correct and complete particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of
       salary provided to him and the value thereof. The statement shall be in the
       prescribed form and manner. This requirement is applicable only where the
       salary paid/payable to an employee exceeds ` 1,50,000. For other
       employees, the particulars of perquisites/profits in lieu of salary shall be
       given in Form 16 itself.

(4) Circular issued by CBDT

       Every year, the CBDT issues a circular giving details and direction to all
       employers for the purpose of deduction of tax from salaries payable to the
       employees during the relevant financial year. These instructions should be
       followed.

(5) Requirement to obtain evidence/ proof/ particulars of claims from the
       employee by the employer

       Sub-section (2D) casts responsibility on the person responsible for paying
       any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" to obtain from the
       assessee, the evidence or proof or particulars of prescribed claims (including

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
     ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                       a  7.9  a

claim for set-off of loss) under the provisions of the Act in the prescribed
form and manner, for the purposes of ­

(1) estimating income of the assessee; or

(2) computing tax deductible under section 192(1).

In case an employee has intimated his employer of his intent to exercise the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A), Rule 26C requires furnishing of evidence of the following
claims by him to the person responsible for making payment under section
192(1) in Form No.12BB for the purpose of estimating his income or
computing the amount of tax to be deducted at source:

S.   Nature of Claim                                        Evidence or particulars

No.                                                Name, address and PAN of the
                                                   landlord(s) where the aggregate rent
1. House Rent Allowance                            paid during the previous year
                                                   exceeds ` 1 lakh.

2. Leave Travel Concession Evidence of expenditure
        or Assistance

3. Deduction of interest Name, address and PAN of the lender
        under the head "Income
        from house property"

4. Deduction          under Evidence of investment or
        Chapter VI-A             expenditure.

3.2 Interest on securities [Section 193]

(1) Person responsible for deduction of tax at source

       This section casts responsibility on every person responsible for paying to a
       resident any income by way of interest on securities, being the amount or
       the aggregate of amount exceeding ` 10,000 during the financial year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.10  INCOME TAX LAW

(2) Meaning of interest on securities [Section 2(28B)]

       Interest on securities means -

       (i) interest on any security of the Central Government or a State
               Government

       (ii) interest on debentures or other securities for money issued by or on
               behalf of a local authority or a company or a corporation established
               by a Central, State or Provincial Act.

(3) Rate of TDS

       Such person is vested with the responsibility to deduct income-tax at the
       rates in force.

       The rate at which tax is deductible under section 193 is 10%, both in the
       case of domestic companies and non-corporate resident assessees.

(4) Time of tax deduction at source

       Tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such income to the account
       of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a
       cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

       Where any income by way of interest on securities is credited to any
       account in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income,
       such crediting is deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the
       payee and tax has to be deducted at source. The account to which such
       interest is credited may be called "Interest Payable account" or "Suspense
       account" or by any other name.

(5) Non-applicability of TDS under section 193

       No tax deduction is to be made from any interest payable:

       (i) on National Development Bonds;

       (ii) on 7-year National Savings Certificates (IV Issue);

       (iii) on debentures issued by any institution or authority or any public
               sector company or any co-operative society (including a co-operative
               land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank), as
               notified by the Central Government;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.11  a

Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 27
& 28/2018, dated 18-06-2018, notified-
(i) "Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond"

      issued by Power Finance Corporation Limited {PFCL} and
(ii) "Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains

      Bond" issued by Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited
      {IRFCL}
Thus, no tax is required to be deducted at source on interest payable
on "Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond" and
"Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond".

       (iv) on any security of the Central Government or a State Government

               Note ­ It may be noted that tax has to be deducted at source in
               respect of interest payable on 8% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2003, or
               7.75% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2018, Floating Rate Savings Bonds,
               2020 (Taxable) or any other notified security of the Central
               Government or State Government only if such interest payable
               exceeds ` 10,000 during the financial year.

       (v) on securities to LIC, GIC, subsidiaries of GIC or any other insurer,
               provided ­

               (a) the securities are owned by them or

               (b) they have full beneficial interest in such securities.

3.3 Interest other than interest on securities [Section 194A]

This section deals with the scheme of deduction of tax at source from interest
other than interest on securities. The main provisions are the following:

(1) Applicability of TDS under section 194A

       This section applies only to interest, other than "interest on securities",
       credited or paid by assessees other than individuals or Hindu undivided
       family. However, an individual or Hindu undivided family whose total sales,
       gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him
       exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession
       during the immediately preceding financial year is liable to deduct tax at
       source under this section.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.12  INCOME TAX LAW

(2) Time of tax deduction at source

       The deduction of tax must be made at the time of crediting such interest to
       the account of the payee or at the time of its payment in cash or by any
       other mode, whichever is earlier.

       Where any such interest is credited to any account in the books of account
       of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be
       credit of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be
       deducted at source. The account to which such interest is credited may be
       called "Interest Payable account" or "Suspense account" or by any other
       name.

       The CBDT has, vide Circular No.3/2010 dated 2.3.2010, given a clarification
       regarding deduction of tax at source on payment of interest on time
       deposits under section 194A by banks following Core-branch Banking
       Solutions (CBS) software. It has been clarified that Explanation to section
       194A is not meant to apply in cases of banks where credit is made to
       provisioning account on daily/monthly basis for the purpose of macro
       monitoring only by the use of CBS software. It has been further clarified that
       since no constructive credit to the depositor's/payee's account takes place
       while calculating interest on time deposits on daily or monthly basis in the
       CBS software used by banks, tax need not be deducted at source on such
       provisioning of interest by banks for the purposes of macro monitoring
       only. In such cases, tax shall be deducted at source on accrual of interest at
       the end of financial year or at periodic intervals as per practice of the bank
       or as per the depositor's/ payee's requirement or on maturity or on
       encashment of time deposits, whichever event takes place earlier, whenever
       the aggregate of amounts of interest income credited or paid or likely to be
       credited or paid during the financial year by the banks exceeds the limits
       specified in section 194A.

       Note - The time for making the payment of tax deducted at source would
       reckon from the date of credit of interest made constructively to the
       account of the payee.

(3) Rate of TDS

       The rate at which the deduction is to be made is given in Part II of the First
       Schedule to the Annual Finance Act. The rate at which tax is to be deducted

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.13  a

       is 10% both in the case of non-corporate resident assessees and domestic
       companies.

(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194A

       No deduction of tax shall be made in the following cases:

       (a) If the aggregate amount of interest paid or credited during the
              financial year does not exceed ` 10,000.

              This limit is ` 50,000 where the payer is a ­

               (i) banking company;

               (ii) a co-operative society engaged in banking business; and

               (iii) post office and interest is credited or paid in respect of any
                       deposit under notified schemes ("Senior Citizens Saving Scheme,
                       2019" and "Mahila Samman Savings Certificate, 2023" have been
                       notified by the Central Government for this purpose)

              In respect of (i), (ii) and (iii) above, the limit is ` 1,00,000, in case of
               payee, being a senior citizen.

               The limit will be calculated with respect to income credited or paid by
               a branch of a banking company or a co-operative society or a public
               company in case of:

               (i) time deposits with a banking company

               (ii) time deposits with a co-operative society carrying on the
                       business of banking; and

               (iii) deposits with housing finance companies, provided:

                       - they are public companies formed and registered in India

                       - their main object is to carry on the business of providing
                               long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses
                               in India for residential purposes.

               The threshold limit will be reckoned with reference to the total interest
               credited or paid by the banking company or the co-operative society
               or the public company, as the case may be, (and not with reference to
               each branch), where such banking company or co-operative society or
               public company has adopted core banking solutions.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.14  INCOME TAX LAW

(b) Interest paid or credited by a firm to any of its partners;

(c) Interest paid or credited in respect of deposits under any scheme
       framed by the Central Government and notified by it in this behalf;

(d) Interest income credited or paid in respect of deposits (other than
       time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995) with a bank to which the
       Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies;

(e) Income paid or credited by a co-operative society (other than a co-
       operative bank) to a member thereof or to such income credited or
       paid by a co-operative society to any other co-operative society;

(f) Interest income credited or paid in respect of -

       (i) deposits with primary agricultural credit society or a primary
               credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-
               operative land development bank;

       (ii) deposit (other than time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995)
               with a co-operative society [other than cooperative society or
               bank referred to in (i)] engaged in carrying on the business of
               banking.

       From a combined reading of (e) and (f), it can be inferred that a co-
       operative bank other than mentioned in (i) above is required to
       deduct tax at source on payment of interest on time deposit to its
       members. However, it is not required to deduct tax from the payment
       of interest on time deposit, to a depositor, being a co-operative
       society.

       However, a cooperative society referred to in (e) or (f) is liable to
       deduct tax if ­

       (i) the total sales, gross receipts or turnover of the co-operative
               society exceeds ` 50 crores during the financial year immediately
               preceding the financial year in which interest is credited or paid;
               and

       (ii) the amount of interest or the aggregate amount of interest
               credited or paid, or is likely to be credited or paid, during the
              financial year is more than ` 1,00,000 in case of payee being a
              senior citizen and ` 50,000, in any other case.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.15  a

       Thus, such co-operative society is required to deduct tax under
       section 194A on interest credited or paid by it ­

       (a) to its member or to any other co-operative society; or

       (b) in respect of deposits with a primary agricultural credit society
               or a primary credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank
               or a co-operative land development bank or

       (c) in respect of deposits with a co-operative bank other than a co-
               operative society or bank engaged in carrying on the business of
               banking

(g) Interest income credited or paid by the Central Government under any
       provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

(h) Interest paid or credited to the following entities:

       (i) banking companies, or co-operative societies engaged in the
               business of banking, including co-operative land mortgage
               banks;

       (ii) financial corporations established by or under any Central, State
               or Provincial Act.

       (iii) the Life Insurance Corporation of India.

       (iv) companies and co-operative societies carrying on the business
               of insurance.

       (v) the Unit Trust of India; and

       (vi) notified institution, association, body or class of institutions,
               associations or bodies (National Skill Development Fund and
               Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO),
               New Delhi have been notified by the Central Government for this
               purpose).

(i) income credited by way of interest on the compensation amount
       awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal;

(j) income paid by way of interest on the compensation amount awarded
       by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal where the amount of such
       income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such
       income paid during the financial year does not exceed ` 50,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.16  INCOME TAX LAW

       (k) income paid or payable by an infrastructure capital company or
               infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt fund or public sector
               company or scheduled bank in relation to a zero coupon bond issued
               on or after 1.6.2005.

       Notes

       (1) The expression "time deposits" [for the purpose of (4)(a), (d) and (f)
               above] means the deposits, including recurring deposits, repayable
               on the expiry of fixed periods.

       (2) Senior citizen means an individual resident in India who is of the age
               of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year.

(5) Power to the Central Government to issue notification

       The Central Government is empowered to issue notification for non-
       deduction of tax at source or deduction of tax at a lower rate, from such
       payment to such person or class of persons, specified in that notification.

ILLUSTRATION 2
Examine the TDS implications under section 194A in the cases mentioned
hereunder­

(i) On 1.10.2025, Mr. Harish made a six-month fixed deposit of ` 15 lakh@9%
       p.a. with ABC Co-operative Bank. The fixed deposit matures on 31.3.2026.

(ii) On 1.6.2025, Mr. Ganesh made three nine months fixed deposits of ` 3 lakh
       each, carrying interest@9% p.a. with Dwarka Branch, Janakpuri Branch and
       Rohini Branch of XYZ Bank, a bank which has adopted CBS. The fixed deposits
       mature on 28.2.2026.

(iii) On 1.10.2025, Mr. Rajesh started a six months recurring deposit of
       ` 2,00,000 per month@8% p.a. with PQR Bank. The recurring deposit matures
       on 31.3.2026.

SOLUTION
(i) ABC Co-operative Bank has to deduct tax at source@10% on the interest of

       ` 67,500 (9% × ` 15 lakh × ½) under section 194A. The tax deductible at
       source under section 194A from such interest is, therefore, ` 6,750.

(ii) XYZ Bank has to deduct tax at source@10% u/s 194A, since the aggregate
       interest on fixed deposit with the three branches of the bank is ` 60,750

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                       a  7.17  a

       [3,00,000 × 3 × 9% × 9/12], which exceeds the threshold limit of ` 50,000.
       Since XYZ Bank has adopted CBS, the aggregate interest credited/paid by all
       branches has to be considered. Since the aggregate interest of ` 60,750
       exceeds the threshold limit of ` 50,000, tax has to be deducted@10%
       u/s 194A.

(iii) No tax has to be deducted under section 194A by PQR Bank on the interest
       of ` 28,000 falling due on recurring deposit on 31.3.2026 to Mr. Rajesh,
       since such interest does not exceed the threshold limit of ` 50,000.

3.4 Winnings from online games [Section 194BA]

(1) Applicability of TDS under section 194BA

       Any person responsible for paying to any person any income by way of
       winnings from online games during the financial year is required to deduct
       tax @30% on the net winnings in a person's user account as computed in
       prescribed manner, at the end of the F.Y.

(2) TDS on withdrawal during the financial year

       In case there is withdrawal from user account during the F.Y., tax would be
       deducted at the time of such withdrawal on net winnings comprised in such
       withdrawal. In addition, tax would also be deducted on the remaining
       amount of net winnings in the user account as computed in prescribed
       manner at the end of the F.Y.

(3) Net winnings wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind

       Where the net winnings are wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in
       kind but the part in cash is not sufficient to meet the liability of deduction
       of tax in respect of whole of the net winnings, the person responsible for
       paying shall, before releasing the winnings, ensure that tax has been paid in
       respect of the net winnings.

(4) Meaning of certain terms

S.No.  Term                                        Meaning

(i) Online gaming An intermediary that offers one or more online

       intermediary  games.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.18                INCOME TAX LAW

   (ii) User           Any person who accesses or avails any computer
   (iii) User account  resource of an online gaming intermediary.

                       Account of a user registered with an online
                       gaming intermediary.

(5) Power of the CBDT to issue guidelines

       In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
       section, the CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines, with the approval of
       the Central Government, for the purpose of removing the difficulty.

       Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of
       Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the
       person liable to collect tax.

       Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide circular No. 5/2023 dated 22.5.2023, issued
       the following guidelines:

       Question 1: There are a large number of gamers who play with very
       insignificant amount and withdraw also very small amount. Deducting tax at
       source under section 194BA for each insignificant withdrawal would increase
       compliance for tax deductor. Can there be relaxation to ease compliance?

       Answer: Tax may not be deducted on withdrawal on satisfaction of all of
       the following conditions, namely:-

       (i) net winnings comprised in the amount withdrawn does not exceed
               ` 100 in a month;

       (ii) tax not deducted on account of this concession is deducted at a time
               when the net winnings comprised in withdrawal exceeds ` 100 in the
               same month or subsequent month or if there is no such withdrawal, at
               the end of the financial year; and

       (iii) the deductor undertakes responsibility of paying the difference if the
               balance in the user account at the time of tax deduction under section
               194BA is not sufficient to discharge the tax deduction liability.

       Question 2: When the net winnings is in kind how will tax deduction under
       section 194BA operate?

       Answer: At the outset, it may be clarified that where money in user account
       is used to buy an item in kind and given to user then it is net winnings in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.19  a

       cash only and the deductor is required to deduct tax at source under
       section 194BA accordingly.

       However, there could be a situation where the winning of the game is a
       prize in kind. In that situation provision of section 194BA(2) will operate.

       According to this where the net winnings are wholly in kind or partly in
       cash, and partly in kind but the part in cash is not sufficient to meet the
       liability of deduction of tax in respect of whole of the net winnings. In these
       situations, the person responsible for paying, shall, before releasing the
       winnings, ensure that tax has been paid in respect of the net winnings. In
       the above situation, the deductor will release the net winnings in kind after
       the deductee provides proof of payment of such tax (e.g., Challan details
       etc.).

       In the alternative, as an option to remove difficulty if any, the deductor may
       deduct the tax under section 194BA and pay to the Government.

       Question 3: How will the valuation of winnings in kind required to be
       carried out?

       Answer: The valuation would be based on fair market value of the winnings
       in kind except in following cases:-

       (i) The online game intermediary has purchased the winnings before
               providing it to the user. In that case the purchase price shall be the
               value for winnings.

       (ii) The online game intermediary manufactures such items given as
               winnings. In that case, the price that it charges to its customers for
               such items shall be the value for such winnings.

       It is further clarified that GST will not be included for the purposes of
       valuation of winnings for TDS under section 194BA.

3.5 Payments to contractors and sub-contractors
      [Section 194C]

(1) Applicability of TDS under section 194C

       Section 194C provides for deduction of tax at source from the payment
       made to resident contractors and sub-contractors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.20  INCOME TAX LAW

       Tax has to be deducted at source under section 194C by any person
       responsible for paying any sum to a resident contractor for carrying out any
       work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in pursuance of
       a contract between the contractor and the ­

       (i) the Central Government or any State Government; or

       (ii) any local authority; or

       (iii) any statutory corporation; or

       (iv) any company; or

       (v) any co-operative society; or

       (vi) any statutory authority dealing with housing accommodation or for
               the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns
               and villages or for both; or

       (vii) any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; or

       (viii) any trust; or

       (ix) any university established or incorporated by or under a Central, State
               or Provincial Act and an institution declared to be a university under
               the UGC Act, 1956; or

       (x) any firm; or

       (xi) any Government of a foreign State or foreign enterprise or any
               association or body established outside India; or

       (xii) any person, being an individual, HUF, AOP or BOI, who has total sales,
               gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
               by him exceeding ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case
               of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the
               financial year in which such sum is credited or paid to the account of
               the contractor.

(2) Time of deduction

       Tax has to be deducted at the time of payment of such sum or at the time
       of credit of such sum to the account of the contractor, whichever is earlier.

       Where any such sum is credited to any account in the books of account of
       the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be credit
       of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be deducted

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a        7.21  a

       at source. The account to which such sum is credited may be called
       "Suspense account" or by any other name.

       However, no tax has to be deducted at source in respect of payments made
       by individuals/HUF to a contractor exclusively for personal purposes.

(3) Rate of TDS

       The rate of TDS under section 194C on payments to contractors would be
        1%, where the payee is an individual or HUF and 2% in respect of other
       payees. The same rates of TDS would apply for both contractors and sub-
       contractors.

       The applicable rates of TDS under section 194C are as follows ­

                                      Payee                 TDS rate
Individual HUF contractor/sub-contractor                        1%
Other than individual/HUF contractor/ sub-contractor            2%
Contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished)          Nil
Sub-contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished)      Nil

(4) Threshold limit for deduction of tax at source under section 194C

       No deduction will be required to be made if the consideration for the
       contract does not exceed ` 30,000. However, to prevent the practice of
       composite contracts being split up into contracts valued at less than
        ` 30,000 to avoid tax deduction, it has been provided that tax will be
       required to be deducted at source where the amount credited or paid or
       likely to be credited or paid to a contractor or sub-contractor exceeds
        ` 30,000 in a single payment or ` 1,00,000 in the aggregate during a
       financial year.

       Therefore, even if a single payment to a contractor does not exceed
        ` 30,000, TDS provisions under section 194C would be attracted where the
       aggregate of the amounts of such sums credited or paid or likely to be
       credited or paid to the contractor during the financial year exceeds
        ` 1,00,000.

       ILLUSTRATION 3

       ABC Ltd. makes the following payments to Mr. X, a contractor, for contract
       work during the P.Y.2025-26­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.22  INCOME TAX LAW

       ` 20,000 on 1.5.2025

       ` 25,000 on 1.8.2025

       ` 28,000 on 1.12.2025

       On 1.3.2026, a payment of ` 30,000 is due to Mr. X on account of a contract work.

       Discuss whether ABC Ltd. is liable to deduct tax at source under section 194C
       from payments made to Mr. X.

       SOLUTION
       In this case, the individual contract payments made to Mr. X does not
       exceed ` 30,000. However, since the aggregate amount paid to Mr. X
       during the P.Y. 2025-26 exceeds ` 1,00,000 (on account of the last payment
       of ` 30,000, due on 1.3.2026, taking the total from ` 73,000 to ` 1,03,000),
       the TDS provisions under section 194C would get attracted. Tax has to be
       deducted@1% on the entire amount of ` 1,03,000 from the last payment of
       ` 30,000 and the balance of ` 28,970 (i.e., ` 30,000 ­ ` 1,030) has to be paid
       to Mr. X.

(5) Definition of work

       Work includes ­

       (a) advertising;

       (b) broadcasting and telecasting including production of programmes for
               such broadcasting or telecasting;

       (c) carriage of goods or passengers by any mode of transport other than
               by railways;

       (d) catering;

       (e) manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement
               or specification of a customer by using material purchased from such
               customer or its associate, being a person related to the customer in
               such manner as defined u/s 40A(2)(b), (i.e., the customer would be in
               the place of assessee; and the associate would be the related
               person(s) mentioned in that section).

       However, "work" shall not include manufacturing or supplying a product
       according to the requirement or specification of a customer by using raw
       material purchased from a person, other than such customer or associate of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS         a  7.23                a

       such customer, as such a contract is a contract for `sale'. However, this will
       not be applicable to a contract which does not entail manufacture or supply
       of an article or thing (e.g. a construction contract).

       It may be noted that the term "work" would include manufacturing or
       supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a
       customer by using material purchased from such customer or its associate.
       In such a case, tax shall be deducted on the invoice value excluding the
       value of material purchased from such customer or its associate, if such
       value is mentioned separately in the invoice. Where the material component
       has not been separately mentioned in the invoice, tax shall be deducted on
       the whole of the invoice value.

       Further, it is clarified that "work" shall also not include any sum referred to in
       section 194J(1).

(6) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194C

       No deduction is required to be made from the sum credited or paid or likely
       to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a
       contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing
       goods carriages, if he furnishes his PAN to the deductor.

       In order to convey the true intent of law, it has been clarified that this
       relaxation from the requirement to deduct tax at source shall only be
       applicable to the payment in the nature of transport charges (whether paid
       by a person engaged in the business of transport or otherwise) made to a
       contractor, who fulfills the following three conditions cumulatively -

owns ten or less     is engaged in the               has furnished a
goods carriages      business of plying,            declaration to this
                  hiring or leasing goods          effect along with his
   at any time
   during the              carriages                         PAN
 previous year
                          Exemption
                         u/s 194C(6)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.24  INCOME TAX LAW

       Meaning of Goods carriage:
       Goods carriage means -

       (i) any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the
               carriage of goods; or

       (ii) any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted, when used for the
               carriage of goods.

               The term "motor vehicle" does not include vehicles having less than
               four wheels and with engine capacity not exceeding 25cc as well as
               vehicles running on rails or vehicles adapted for use in a factory or in
               enclosed premises.

(7) Important points

       (i) The deduction of income-tax will be made from sums paid for carrying
               out any work or for supplying labour for carrying out any work. In
               other words, the section will apply only in relation to `works contracts'
               and `labour contracts' and will not cover contracts for sale of goods.

       (ii) Contracts for rendering professional services by lawyers, physicians,
               surgeons, engineers, accountants, architects, consultants etc., cannot
               be regarded as contracts for carrying out any "work" and accordingly,
               no deduction of income-tax is to be made from payments relating to
               such contracts under this section. Separate provisions for fees for
               professional services have been made under section 194J.

       (iii) The deduction of income-tax must be made at the time of credit of the sum
               to the account of the contractor, or at the time of payment thereof in cash
               or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

ILLUSTRATION 4
Certain concessions are granted to transport operators in the context of cash
payments u/s 40A(3) and deduction of tax at source u/s 194-C. Elucidate.

SOLUTION

Section 40A(3) provides for disallowance of expenditure incurred in respect of
which payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day exceeds
` 10,000 and such payment or payments are made otherwise than by account
payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system
through bank account or through other prescribed electronic modes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.25  a

However, in case of payment made to transport operators for plying, hiring or
leasing goods carriages, the disallowance will be attracted only if the payment
made to a person in a day exceeds ` 35,000. Therefore, payment or aggregate of
payments up to ` 35,000 in a day can be made to a transport operator otherwise
than by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of
electronic system through bank account or through other prescribed electronic
modes, without attracting disallowance u/s 40A(3).

Under section 194C, tax had to be deducted in respect of payments made to
contractors at the rate of 1%, in case the payment is made to individual or Hindu
Undivided Family or at the rate of 2%, in any other case.

However, no deduction is required to be made from any sum credited or paid or
likely to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a
contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods
carriages, if the following conditions are fulfilled:-

(1) He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the previous year.

(2) He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages;

(3) He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN.

3.6 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H]

(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS

       Any person other than an individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying
       any income by way of commission (other than insurance commission) or
       brokerage to a resident shall deduct income tax @2%.

       However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover
       from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case
       of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year
       immediately preceding financial year in which such commission or
       brokerage is credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.

(2) Time of deduction

       The deduction shall be made at the time such income is credited to the
       account of the payee or at the time of payment in cash or by issue of
       cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.26  INCOME TAX LAW

       Even where income is credited to some other account, whether called
       "Suspense account" or by any other name, in the books of account of the
       person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be
       credit to the account of the payee for the purposes of this section.

(3) Threshold limit

       No deduction is required if the amount of such income or the aggregate of
       such amount does not exceed ` 20,000 during the financial year.

(4) Meaning of "Commission or brokerage"

       "Commission or brokerage" includes any payment received or receivable,
       directly or indirectly, by a person acting on behalf of another person

       - for services rendered, or

       - for any services in the course of buying or selling of goods, or

       - in relation to any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or
               thing, other than securities.

(5) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194H

       (i) This section is not applicable to professional services. "Professional
               Services" means services rendered by a person in the course of
               carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or
               the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior
               decoration or such other profession as notified by the CBDT for the
               purpose of compulsory maintenance of books of account under
               section 44AA.

       (ii) Further, there would be no requirement to deduct tax at source on
               commission or brokerage payments by BSNL or MTNL to their public
               call office (PCO) franchisees.

(6) Applicability of TDS provisions on payments by television channels and
       publishing houses to advertisement companies for procuring or
       canvassing for advertisements [Circular No. 05/2016, dated 29-2-2016]

       There are two types of payments involved in the advertising business:

       (i) Payment by client to the advertising agency, and

       (ii) Payment by advertising agency to the television channel/newspaper
               company

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.27  a

       The applicability of TDS on these payments has already been dealt with in
       Circular No. 715 dated 8-8-1995, where it has been clarified in Question
       Nos. 1 & 2 that while TDS under section 194C (as work contract) will be
       applicable on the first type of payment, there will be no TDS under section
       194C on the second type of payment e.g. payment by advertising agency to
       the media company.

       However, another issue has been raised in various cases as to whether the
       fees/charges taken or retained by advertising companies from media
       companies for canvasing/booking advertisements (typically 15% of the
       billing) is `commission' or `discount' for attracting the provisions of
       section 194H.

       The CBDT has clarified that no TDS is attracted on payments made by television
       channels/newspaper companies to the advertising agency for booking or
       procuring of or canvassing for advertisements. It is also further clarified that
       `commission' referred to in Question No.27 of the CBDT's Circular No. 715
       dated 8-8-1995 does not refer to payments by media companies to advertising
       companies for booking of advertisements but to payments for engagement of
       models, artists, photographers, sportspersons, etc. and therefore, is not
       relevant to the issue of TDS referred to in this Circular.

ILLUSTRATION 5

Moon TV, a television channel, made payment of ` 50 lakhs to a production house
for production of programme for telecasting as per the specifications given by the
channel. The copyright of the programme is also transferred to Moon TV. Would
such payment be liable for tax deduction at source under section 194C? Discuss.

Also, examine whether the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C
would be attracted if the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of
telecasting rights of the content already produced by the production house.

SOLUTION

In this case, since the programme is produced by the production house as per the
specifications given by Moon TV, a television channel, and the copyright is also
transferred to the television channel, the same falls within the scope of definition
of the term `work' under section 194C. Therefore, the payment of ` 50 lakhs made
by Moon TV to the production house would be subject to tax deduction at source
under section 194C.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.28  INCOME TAX LAW

If, however, the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of telecasting
rights of the content already produced by the production house, there is no
contract for `'carrying out any work", as required in section 194C(1). Therefore,
such payment would not be liable for tax deduction at source under
section 194C.

3.7 Rent [Section 194-I]

(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS

       Any person other than individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying to a
       resident any income by way of rent, is liable to deduct tax at source.

       However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover
       from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case
       of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year
       immediately preceding financial year in which such rent was credited or
       paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.

(2) Rate of TDS

       Tax has to be deducted at the rate of:

       (i) 2% in respect of rent for plant, machinery or equipment;
       (ii) 10% in respect of other rental payments (i.e., rent for use of any land

               or building, including factory building, or land appurtenant to a
               building, including factory building, or furniture or fittings).

(3) Time of deduction

       This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such income to the
       account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue
       of cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

       Where any such income is credited to any account, whether called
       "Suspense account" or by any other name, in the books of account of the
       person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be
       credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this
       section will apply accordingly.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.29  a

(4) Threshold limit

       No deduction shall be made where the amount of rent credited or paid for a
       month or part of a month does not exceed ` 50,000.

(5) Meaning of Rent

       "Rent" means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
       lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either
       separately or together) any ­

       (i) land; or

       (ii) building (including factory building); or

       (iii) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or

       (iv) machinery; or

       (v) plant; or

       (vi) equipment; or

       (vii) furniture; or

       (viii) fittings,

       whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee.

(6) Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to payments made by
       the customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage owners

       CBDT Circular No.1/2008 dated 10.1.2008 provides clarification regarding
       applicability of provisions of section 194-I to payments made by the
       customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage owners.

       The main function of the cold storage is to preserve perishable goods by
       means of a mechanical process, and storage of such goods is only incidental
       in nature. The customer is also not given any right to use any demarcated
       space/place or the machinery of the cold store and thus does not become a
       tenant. Therefore, the provisions of 194-I are not applicable to the cooling
       charges paid by the customers of the cold storage.

       However, since the arrangement between the customers and cold storage
       owners are basically contractual in nature, the provision of section 194-C
       will be applicable to the amounts paid as cooling charges by the customers
       of the cold storage.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.30  INCOME TAX LAW

(7) No requirement to deduct tax at source under section 194-I on
       remittance of Passenger Service Fees (PSF) by an Airline to an Airport
       Operator [Circular No. 21/2017, dated 12.06.2017]

       The primary requirement of any payment to qualify as rent is that the
       payment must be for the use of land and building and mere
       incidental/minor/ insignificant use of the same while providing other
       facilities and service would not make it a payment for use of land and
       buildings so as to attract section 194-I.

       Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that the provisions of
       section 194-I shall not be applicable on payment of PSF by an airline to
       Airport Operator.

(8) Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to service tax
       component of rental income

       CBDT Circular No.4/2008 dated 28.4.2008 provides clarification on
       deduction of tax at source (TDS) on service tax component of rental income
       under section 194-I.

       As per the provisions of 194-I, tax is deductible at source on income by way
       of rent paid to any resident. Further, rent has been defined in 194-I to mean
       any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, tenancy
       or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either separately or
       together) any,-

       (a) land; or

       (b) building (including factory building); or

       (c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or

       (d) machinery; or

       (e) plant; or

       (f) equipment; or

       (g) furniture; or

       (h) fittings,

       whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.31  a

       Service tax paid by the tenant doesn't partake the nature of income of the
       landlord. The landlord only acts as a collecting agency for Government for
       collection of service tax. Therefore, tax deduction at source under section
       194-I would be required to be made on the amount of rent paid/payable
       without including the service tax.

       Note - It is possible to take a view that the clarification given in Circular
       No.4/2008 would apply in the GST regime also.

                        Clarification regarding TDS on Goods and Services Tax (GST)
                        component comprised in payments made to residents
                        [Circular No. 23/2017 dated 19.07.2017]

       The CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that wherever in terms of the
       agreement or contract between the payer and the payee, the component of
       `GST on services' comprised in the amount payable to a resident is indicated
       separately, tax shall be deducted at source on the amount paid or payable
       without including such `GST on services' component.

       GST shall include Integrated Goods and Services Tax, Central Goods and
       Services Tax, State Goods and Services Tax and Union Territory Goods and
       Services Tax.

       Further, for the purposes of this Circular, any reference to "service tax" in an
       existing agreement or contract which was entered into prior to 01.07.2017
       shall be treated as "GST on services" with respect to the period from
       01.07.2017 onward till the expiry of such agreement or contract.

(9) Clarification on applicability of TDS provisions of section 194-I on
       lumpsum lease premium paid for acquisition of long term lease
       [Circular No.35/2016, dated 13-10-2016]

       The issue of whether or not TDS under section 194-I is applicable on "lump
       sum lease premium" or "one-time upfront lease charges" paid by an
       assessee for acquiring long-term leasehold rights for land or any other
       property has been examined by the CBDT.

       Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this Circular, clarified that lump sum lease
       premium or one-time upfront lease charges, which are not adjustable
       against periodic rent, paid or payable for acquisition of long-term leasehold
       rights over land or any other property are not payments in the nature of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.32  INCOME TAX LAW

       rent within the meaning of section 194-I. Therefore, such payments are not
       liable for TDS under section 194-I.

ILLUSTRATION 6
XYZ Ltd. entered into a lease agreement to take a building on rent from Mr. Kishore
on 1st May 2024, for a monthly rent of ` 46,000, with a 10% escalation in rent
applicable from the second year. Discuss the applicability of TDS provisions under
section 194-I for the P.Y. 2025-26.

SOLUTION
Section 194-I, which governs the deduction of tax at source on payment of rent
exceeding ` 50,000 per month or part of the month, is applicable to all taxable
entities except individuals and HUFs, whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover
from the business or profession carried on by him does not exceed ` 1 crore in
case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year
immediately preceding financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, is
liable to deduct tax at source.

For April 2025, the rent is ` 46,000. However, as per the agreement, the rent from
May 2025 onwards is ` 50,600 per month (` 46,000 x 110%).

Since the rent paid by XYZ Ltd. to Mr. Kishore exceeds ` 50,000 per month from
1st May 2025 to 31st March, 2026, the provisions of section 194-I for deduction of
tax at source attracted. However, tax is not required to be deducted for the rent
paid for April 2025.

The rate applicable for deduction at source under section 194-I on rent paid is
10%, assuming that Mr. Kishore had furnished his PAN to XYZ Ltd.

Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source

= ` 50,600 x 10% x 11 months = ` 55,660

3.8 Payment of rent by certain individuals or Hindu
      undivided family [Section 194-IB]

(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS

       Section 194-IB requires any person, being individual or HUF, other than
       those individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from
       the business or profession exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50
       lakhs in case of profession in the financial year immediately preceding the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.33  a

       financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, responsible for paying
       to a resident any income by way of rent, to deduct income tax @2%.

(2) Threshold limit

       Under this section, tax has to be deducted at source only if the amount of
       such rent exceeds ` 50,000 for a month or part of a month during the
       previous year.

(3) Time of deduction

       This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such rent, for the last
       month of the previous year or the last month of tenancy, if the property is
       vacated during the year, as the case may be, to the account of the payee or
       at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of cheque or draft or by
       any other mode, whichever is earlier.

(4) No requirement to obtain TAN

       The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax
       deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to
       deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194-IB.

(5) Meaning of "Rent"

       "Rent" means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
       lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of any
       land or building or both.

(6) Deduction not to exceed rent for last month

       Where the tax is required to be deducted as per the provisions of section
       206AA, such deduction shall not exceed the amount of rent payable for the
       last month of the previous year or the last month of the tenancy, as the case
       may be [Section 206AA providing for deduction of tax at source at a higher
       rate is discussed at length later on in this chapter]

ILLUSTRATION 7
Mr. X, a salaried individual, pays rent of ` 55,000 per month to Mr. Y from June,
2025. Is he required to deduct tax at source? If so, when is he required to deduct
tax? Also, compute the amount of tax to be deducted at source.

Would your answer change if Mr. X vacated the premises on 31st December, 2025?

Also, what would be your answer if Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.34  INCOME TAX LAW

SOLUTION
Since Mr. X pays rent exceeding ` 50,000 per month in the F.Y. 2025-26, he is
liable to deduct tax at source @2%. The tax is to be deducted in the last month
of the P.Y. 2025-26 i.e., March 2026 or in the last month of tenancy, if the
property is vacated during the year. Since property is not vacated during the
year, ` 11,000 [(` 55,000 x 2% x 10)] has to be deducted from rent payable for
March, 2026.

If Mr. X vacated the premises in December, 2025, then tax of ` 7,700 [(` 55,000 x
2% x 7)] has to be deducted from rent payable for December, 2025.

In case Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X, tax would be deductible@20%,
instead of 2%.

In case 1 above, this would amount to ` 1,10,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 10], but the
same has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for March, 2026.

In case 2 above, this would amount to ` 77,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 7], but the same
has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for December, 2025.

3.9 Fees for professional or technical services [Section 194J]

(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS
       Every person other than an individual or a HUF, who is responsible for
       paying to a resident any sum by way of ­
       (i) fees for professional services; or
       (ii) fees for technical services; or
       (iii) any remuneration or fees or commission, by whatever name called,
               other than those on which tax is deductible under section 192, to a
               director of a company; or
       (iv) royalty, or
       (v) non-compete fees referred to in section 28(va)
       shall deduct tax at source at the rate of ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.35  a

       (a) 2% in case of fees for technical services (not being professional
               services) or royalty in the nature of consideration for sale, distribution
               or exhibition of cinematographic films; and

       (b) 10% in other cases.

       However, in case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of
       call centre, the tax shall be deducted at source @2%

(2) Time of deduction

       The deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such sum to the
       account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue
       of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.

       Where such sum is credited to any account, whether called suspense
       account or by any other name, in the books of accounts of the person liable
       to pay such sum, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such sum to
       the account of the payee and tax has to be deducted accordingly.

(3) Threshold limit

       No tax deduction is required if the amount of fees or the aggregate of the
       amounts of fees credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during a
       financial year does not exceed ` 50,000 in the case of fees for professional
       services, ` 50,000 in the case of fees for technical services, ` 50,000 in the
       case of royalty and ` 50,000 in the case of non-compete fees.

       The limit of ` 50,000 under section 194J is applicable separately for fees for
       professional services, fees for technical services, royalty and non-compete fees
       referred to in section 28(va). It implies that if the payment to a person
       towards each of the above is less than ` 50,000, no tax is required to be
       deducted at source, even though the aggregate payment or credit exceeds
       ` 50,000. However, there is no such exemption limit for deduction of tax on
       any remuneration or fees or commission payable to director of a company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.36                 INCOME TAX LAW

Summary of rates and threshold limit under section 194J for deduction
                                        of tax at source

         Nature of payment                         TDS rate  Separate
                                                               Limit
Fees for technical services (not being             2%
                                                             ` 50,000

professional services)

Fees for professional services                     10%       ` 50,000

Royalty in the nature of consideration for         2%

sale, distribution or exhibition of                          ` 50,000

cinematographic films

Other royalty                                      10%

Any remuneration or fees or commission,            10%       Nil

by whatever name called, other than those

on which tax is deductible under section

192, to a director of a company

Non-compete fees                                   10%       ` 50,000

In case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of call centre,
the tax shall be deducted at source @2%

ILLUSTRATION 8

XYZ Ltd. makes a payment of ` 28,000 to Mr. Ganesh on 2.8.2025 towards
fees for professional services and another payment of ` 25,000 to him on the
same date towards fees for technical services. Discuss whether TDS provisions
under section 194J are attracted.

SOLUTION

TDS provisions under section 194J would not get attracted, since the limit of
` 50,000 is applicable for fees for professional services and fees for technical
services, separately. It is assumed that there is no other payment to
Mr. Ganesh towards fees for professional services and fees for technical
services during the P.Y.2025-26.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.37  a

(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194J

       (i) An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at
               source.

               However, an individual or HUF, whose total sales, gross receipts or
               turnover from business or profession carried by him exceeds ` 1 crore
               in case of business or ` 50 lakhs in case of profession in the financial
               year immediately preceding the financial year in which the fees for
               professional services or fees for technical services is credited or
               paid is required to deduct tax on such fees.

                                Since this provision requires such individuals/HUFs to
                                deduct tax at source only in respect of fees for professional
                                services or fees for technical services, it can be inferred that
               individuals and HUFs are not required to deduct tax at source under
               section 194J on royalty and non-compete fees.

       (ii) Further, an individual or Hindu Undivided Family, shall not be liable to
               deduct income-tax on the sum payable by way of fees for professional
               services, in case such sum is credited or paid exclusively for personal
               purposes.

(5) Meaning of "Professional services"

       "Professional services" means services rendered by a person in the course of
       carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the
       profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or
       advertising or such other profession as is notified by the CBDT for the
       purposes of section 44AA or of this section.

       Other professions notified for the purposes of section 44AA are as follows:

       (a) Profession of "authorised representatives";

       (b) Profession of "film artist";

       (c) Profession of "company secretary";

       (d) Profession of "information technology".

       The CBDT has notified the services rendered by following persons in relation
       to the sports activities as Professional Services for the purpose of the
       section 194J:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.38  INCOME TAX LAW

       (a) Sports Persons,
       (b) Umpires and Referees,
       (c) Coaches and Trainers,
       (d) Team Physicians and Physiotherapists,
       (e) Event Managers,
       (f) Commentators,
       (g) Anchors and
       (h) Sports Columnists.
       Accordingly, the requirement of TDS as per section 194J would apply to all
       the aforesaid professions. The term "profession", as such, is of a very wide
       import. However, the term has been defined in this section exhaustively. For
       the purposes of TDS, therefore, all other professions would be outside the
       scope of section 194J. For example, this section will not apply to professions
       of teaching, sculpture, painting etc. unless they are notified.
(6) Meaning of "Fees for technical services"
       The term `fees for technical services' means any consideration (including any
       lump sum consideration) for rendering of any of the following services:
       (i) Managerial services;
       (ii) Technical services;
       (iii) Consultancy services;
       (iv) Provision of services of technical or other personnel.
       It is expressly provided that the term `fees for technical services' will not
       include following types of consideration:
       (i) Consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like project,

               or
       (ii) Consideration which is chargeable under the head `Salaries'.
(7) TPAs liable to deduct tax under section 194J on payment to hospitals
       on behalf of insurance companies
       The CBDT has, through Circular No.8/2009 dated 24.11.2009, clarified that
       TPAs (Third Party Administrator's) who are making payment on behalf of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.39  a

       insurance companies to hospitals for settlement of medical/insurance claims
       etc. under various schemes including cashless schemes are liable to deduct
       tax at source under section 194J on all such payments to hospitals etc. This
       is because the services rendered by hospitals to various patients are
       primarily medical services and, therefore, the provisions of section 194J are
       applicable to payments made by TPAs to hospitals etc.

(8) Consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty
       within the meaning of section 9(1)(vi)

       As per section 9(1)(vi), any income payable by way of royalty in respect of
       any right, property or information is deemed to accrue or arise in India. The
       term "royalty" means consideration for transfer of all or any right in respect
       of certain rights, property or information.

       As per Explanation 4 to section 9(1)(vi), the consideration for use or right to
       use of computer software would be royalty. This Explanation clarifies that
       transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right, property or information
       includes and has always included transfer of all or any right for use or right
       to use a computer software (including granting of a licence) irrespective of
       the medium through which such right is transferred.

       Consequently, the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194J
       would be attracted in respect of consideration for use or right to use
       computer software since the same falls within the definition of royalty as
       per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

                        The Central Government has, vide Notification No.21/2012 dated
                        13.6.2012, effective from 1st July, 2012, exempted certain software
                        payments from the applicability of tax deduction under section
       194J. Accordingly, where payment is made by the transferee for acquisition of
       software from a resident-transferor, the provisions of section 194J would not
       be attracted if-

       (1) the software is acquired in a subsequent transfer without any
               modification by the transferor;

       (2) tax has been deducted under section 194J on payment for any
               previous transfer of such software; and

       (3) the transferee obtains a declaration from the transferor that tax has
               been so deducted along with the PAN of the transferor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.40  INCOME TAX LAW

3.10 Payment made by an individual or a HUF for contract
      work or by way of commission or brokerage or fees for
      professional services [Section 194M]

(1) Applicability and rate of TDS

       Section 194M provides for deduction of tax at source @2% by an individual
       or a HUF responsible for paying any sum during the financial year to any
       resident ­

       (i) for carrying out any work (including supply of labour for carrying out
               any work) in pursuance of a contract; or

       (ii) by way of commission (not being insurance commission referred to in
               section 194D) or brokerage; or

       (iii) by way of fees for professional services.

       It may be noted that only individuals and HUFs (other than those who are
       required to deduct income-tax as per the provisions of section 194C or
       194H or 194J) are required to deduct tax in respect of the above sums
       payable during the financial year to a resident.

(2) Time of deduction

       The tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such sum or at the time
       of payment of such sum, whichever is earlier.

(3) Threshold limit

       No tax is required to be deducted where such sum or, as the case may be,
       aggregate amount of such sums credited or paid to a resident during the
       financial year does not exceed ` 50,00,000

(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194M

       An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at
       source u/s 194M if ­

       (i) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194C for carrying out any
               work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in
               pursuance of a contract i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales,
               gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
               by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of
               profession during the immediately preceding financial year and such

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a    7.41  a

               amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of
               such individual or HUF.

       (ii) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194H on commission
               (not being insurance commission referred to in section 194D) or
               brokerage i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales, gross receipts
               or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceeds
               ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession
               during the immediately preceding financial year.

       (iii) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194J on fees for
               professional services i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales,
               gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
               by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of
               profession during the immediately preceding financial year and such
               amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of
               such individual or HUF.

(5) No requirement to obtain TAN

       The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax
       deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to
       deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194M.

Note - For the meaning of the terms "Work", "Professional services" and
"Commission or brokerage" refer sub-heading "3.5 Payments to contractors and
sub-contractors [Section 194C]", "3.9 Fees for professional or technical services
[Section 194J]" and "3.6 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H]", respectively.

ILLUSTRATION 9

Examine whether TDS provisions would be attracted in the following cases, and if
so, under which section. Also specify the rate of TDS applicable in each case.
Assume that all payments are made to residents.

Particulars of the  Nature of payment                  Aggregate of
        payer                                      payments made in

                                                     the F.Y.2025-26

1. Mr. Ganesh, an Contract Payment for ` 5 lakhs
       individual carrying repair of residential house

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a         7.42           INCOME TAX LAW

on retail business Payment of commission to `                            80,000          in
with turnover of ` 2.5 Mr. Vallish for business November 2025
crores      in    the purposes

P.Y.2024-25

2. Mr. Rajesh, a Contract Payment for ` 20 lakhs in

wholesale        trader reconstruction                              of January,          2026,

whose turnover was residential house (made ` 15 lakhs in Feb

` 95 lakhs in during the period January- 2026 and ` 20 lakhs

P.Y. 2024-25.        March, 2026)                                        in March 2026.

3. Mr. Satish, a salaried Payment of brokerage for ` 51 lakhs

individual           buying a residential house

                     in March, 2026

4. Mr. Dheeraj,   a Contract payment made ` 48 lakhs
       pensioner      during October-November
                      2025 for reconstruction of
                      residential house

SOLUTION

 Particulars      Nature of                             Aggregate        Whether TDS
of the payer      payment                              of payments       provisions are

                                                            in the          attracted?
                                                       F.Y.2025-26

1. Mr. Ganesh, Contract                                ` 5 lakhs No; TDS under section

an individual Payment for                                           194C is not attracted

carrying on repair                                 of               since the payment is for

retail           residential                                        personal purpose. TDS

business with house                                                 under section 194M is

turnover of                                                         not  attracted       as

` 2.5 crores                                                        aggregate of contract

in          the                                                     payment to the payee in

P.Y.2024-25                                                         the P.Y.2025-26 does not

                                                                    exceed ` 50 lakh.

                 Payment of                            ` 80,000 Yes, u/s 194H @2%, since
                 commission to                                      the payment exceeds
                 Mr. Vallish for                                    ` 20,000 and Mr. Ganesh's
                 business                                           turnover exceeds ` 1 crore
                 purposes                                           in the P.Y.2024-25.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                        a      7.43  a

2. Mr. Rajesh, a Contract                             ` 55 lakhs Yes, u/s 194M @2%,

wholesale     Payment for                             since the aggregate of

trader whose reconstruction                           payments (i.e., ` 55

turnover was of residential                           lakhs)            exceed

` 95 lakhs in house                                   ` 50 lakhs. Since, his

P.Y. 2024-25                                          turnover does not

                                                      exceed 1 crore in the

                                                      P.Y.2024-25,         TDS

                                                      provisions under section

                                                      194C are not attracted in

                                                      respect of payments

                                                      made          in     the

                                                      P.Y. 2025-26.

3. Mr. Satish, a Payment of                           ` 51 lakhs Yes, u/s 194M @2%, since
                                                                     the payment of ` 51 lakhs
salaried      brokerage for                                          made in March 2026
                                                                     exceeds the threshold of
individual    buying                               a                 ` 50 lakhs. Since
                                                                     Mr. Satish is a salaried
              residential                                            individual, the provisions
                                                                     of section 194H are not
              house                                                  applicable in this case.

4. Mr. Dheeraj, a Contract                            ` 48 lakhs TDS provisions under

pensioner     payment for                             section 194C are not

              reconstruction                          attracted            since

              of residential                          Mr. Dheeraj is a

              house                                   pensioner. TDS provisions

                                                      under section 194M are

                                                      also not applicable in this

                                                      case, since the payment

                                                      of ` 48 lakhs does not

                                                      exceed the threshold of

                                                      ` 50 lakhs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.44  INCOME TAX LAW

3.11 TDS on cash withdrawal [Section 194N]

(1) Applicability and rate of TDS

       Section 194N provides that every person, being

       - a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies
               (including any bank or banking institution referred under section 51 of
               that Act)

       - a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking or

       - a post office

       who is responsible for paying any sum, being the amount or aggregate of
       amounts, as the case may be, in cash exceeding ` 1 crore during the
       previous year, to any person from one or more accounts maintained by
       such recipient-person with it, shall deduct tax at source @2% of such sum

       However, if the recipient is a co-operative society, tax is required to be
       deducted on any sum exceeding ` 3 crore.

(2) Time of deduction

       This deduction is to be made at the time of payment of such sum.

(3) Modification in rate of TDS and threshold limit of withdrawal for
       recipient who has not furnished return of income for last 3 years

       If the recipient has not furnished the returns of income for all the three
       assessment years relevant to the three previous years, for which the time
       limit to file return of income under section 139(1) has expired, immediately
       preceding the previous year in which the payment of the sum is made, "the
       sum" shall mean the amount or the aggregate of amounts, as the case
       may be, in cash > ` 20 lakhs during the previous year, and the tax shall
       be deducted at the rate of -

       - 2% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the
              case may be, being paid in cash > ` 20 lakhs but  ` 1 crore (` 3
               crore in case the recipient is a co-operative society)

       - 5% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the
              case may be, being paid in cash > ` 1 crore (` 3 crore in case the
               recipient is a co-operative society).

       However, the Central Government is empowered to specify, with the
       consultation of RBI, by notification, the recipient in whose case this

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                 ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                             a              a

                                                                              7.45

     provision shall not apply or apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction
     of the conditions specified in such notification.

(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194N

     Liability to deduct tax at source under section 194N shall not be applicable
     to any payment made to ­

     (i) the Government

     (ii) any banking company or co-operative society engaged in carrying on
            the business of banking or a post-office

     (iii) any business correspondent of a banking company or co-operative
            society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance
            with the RBI guidelines

     (iv) any white label ATM operator of a banking company or co-operative
            society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance
            with the authorisation issued by the RBI under the Payment and
            Settlement Systems Act, 2007

     The Central Government may specify, with the consultation of RBI, by
     notification, the recipient in whose case section 194N shall not apply or
     apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions specified
     in such notification.

Example

The persons referred to in (i) to (vi) in Column (2) of the table below have always
been filing their returns of income on or before the due date u/s 139(1). The persons
mentioned in (vii) to (x) in Column (2) of the table below have not filed their returns
of income for the last five years. Determine the liability of deduction of tax at
source u/s 194N by the bank/co-operative bank referred to in column (3) of the
table below in each of the following individual cases, assuming that this is the only
withdrawal in the P.Y.2025-26 by the persons referred to in Column (2).

(1)  (2)         (3)                               (4)       (5)                (6)

                 Bank/Co-                          Date of Amount of

        Person   operative                         withdrawal withdrawal        TDS u/s 194N
     making the  Bank from                                                 (`)         (`)
     withdrawal
                    which
                  money is

                 withdrawn

(i) Mr. Harshit  SBI                               1.7.2025  1,10,00,000 ` 10,00,000 x
                                                                               2% = ` 20,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
      a  7.46              INCOME TAX LAW

(ii) Mr. Pranav       SBI                          1.8.2025     90,00,000      Nil (since
                                                   1.9.2025   2,70,00,000  withdrawals <
(iii) ABC Co-             SBI                      1.9.2025   3,10,00,000
          operative                                                           ` 1 crore)
           Society    MNO Co-
                      operative                                                Nil (since
(iv) XYZ Co-                                                               withdrawals <
          operative      bank
           Society    MNO Co-                                                 ` 3 crore)
                      operative
(v) Mr. Vaibhav                                                            ` 10,00,000 x
                         bank                                              2% = ` 20,000
                      MNO Co-
                      operative                    1.9.2025   2,10,00,000 ` 1,10,00,000 x
                                                                               2% = ` 2,20,000
                         bank
(vi)     A Ltd.       MNO Co-                      1.10.2025  1,05,00,000 ` 5,00,000 x 2%
                      operative                                                    = ` 10,000

(vii) M/s. DEF &         bank                      1.2.2026   90,00,000 ` 70,00,000 x
         Co., a firm     BOI                                                   2% = ` 1,40,000

(viii) Mr. Varun                                   1.2.2026   1,20,00,000   ` 80,00,000 x
                                                                                2% (+)
(ix) Mr. Rakesh       BOI                          1.2.2026    45,00,000
                                                   1.2.2026   3,30,00,000   ` 20,00,000 x
(x) PQR Co-           BOI                                                  5% = ` 2,60,000

         operative                                                          ` 25,00,000 x
                                                                            2% = ` 50,000
         Society
                                                                           ` 2,80,00,000 x
                                                                                2% (+)

                                                                            ` 30,00,000 x
                                                                           5% = ` 7,10,000

3.12 OTHER TDS PROVISIONS

The other TDS provisions are given below in tabular form -

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section  Nature of     Threshold      Payer         Payee  Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                            payment        Limit for                            TDS deduction
                                                                        deduction of
                                                                        tax at source

                                                   192A     Premature   Payment or Trustees of the Individual 10% on At the time Exemption from TDS
                                                            withdrawal
                                                            from        aggregate        EPF Scheme or (Employee) premature of payment 1. Withdrawal     after
                                                            Employees'  payment                                                                         of 5
                                                            Provident   ` 50,000    any authorised            taxable               continuous service
                                                            Fund                                                                                            of
                                                                                         person under         withdrawal.           years

                                                                                         the Scheme                                 2. In        case                 ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                                                                                                    withdrawal          before

                                                                                                                                    continuous service of 5

                                                                                                                                    years and ­

                                                                                                                                    (a) employee opts for

                                                                                                                                    transfer            of

                                                                                                                                    accumulated balance

                                                                                                                                    to the new employer

                                                                                                                                    (b) termination is due to           a
                                                                                                                                         ill health, contraction
                                                                                                                                         or discontinuance of         7.47
                                                                                                                                         business, cessation of
                                                                                                                                         employment etc.

                                                   194 Dividend         Amount or The Principal Resident      10%          Before   Exemption from TDS

                                                            (including aggregate Officer of a shareholder                  making any Dividend credited or paid to -

                                                            dividends on amount          domestic                          payment (a) LIC, GIC, subsidiaries

                                                            preference > ` 10,000 in company                               by      any of GIC or any other

                                                            shares)     a F.Y., in case                                    mode in                                    a
                                                            a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section     Nature of      Threshold      Payer          Payee  Rate of   Time of Other relevant points
                                                               payment         Limit for                             TDS    deduction
                                                                            deduction of                                                                          a
                                                                            tax at source                            30%

                                                            Dividend        of dividend                                     respect of insurer provided the       7.48

                                                            includes        paid         or                                 any        shares are owned by

                                                            dividends credited to                                           dividend or them, or they have

                                                            under section an individual                                     before     full beneficial interest

                                                            2(22)(a) to shareholder                                         making any in such shares

                                                            2(22)(f).       by any mode                                     distribution (b) any other person as

                                                                            other than                                      or payment may be notified by         INCOME TAX LAW

                                                                            cash                                            of         the             Central

                                                                            >     No                                        dividend.  Government.

                                                                            threshold in

                                                                            other cases

                                                   194B     Winnings from Amount in The         person Any Person           At the time (a) Where the winnings

                                                            any lottery, respect of responsible for                         of         are wholly in kind or

                                                            crossword single                 paying income                  payment.   partly in cash and

                                                            puzzle or card transaction by way of such                                  partly in kind but the

                                                            game or other > ` 10,000. winnings                                         part in cash is not

                                                            game of any                                                                sufficient to meet the

                                                            sort or from                                                               liability of deduction of

                                                            gambling or                                                                tax in respect of whole

                                                            betting of any                                                             of the winnings, the

                                                            form or nature                                                             person responsible for

                                                            (other than                                                                paying shall, before

                                                            winnings from                                                              releasing the winnings,
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section  Nature of         Threshold    Payer              Payee  Rate of   Time of Other relevant points
                                                            payment            Limit for                               TDS    deduction
                                                                            deduction of
                                                                            tax at source                              30%

                                                            any online                                                        ensure that tax has
                                                                                                                              been paid in respect of
                                                            game       in                                                     the winnings.

                                                            respect of

                                                            which TDS u/s                                                     (b) Where winnings are to

                                                            194BA would                                                       be credited and losses                  ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                            be applicable)                                                    are to be debited to

                                                                                                                              the individual a/c of the

                                                                                                                              punter, tax has to be

                                                                                                                              deducted on winnings

                                                                                                                              before set-off of losses.

                                                                                                                              Thereafter, the net

                                                                                                                              amount,              after

                                                                                                                              deduction of tax and

                                                                                                                              losses, has to be paid

                                                                                                                              to the winner.

                                                   194BB Winnings           Amount in Book Maker or a Any Person              At the time `Any horse race' includes,

                                                            from horse respect of person holding                              of payment wherever  the                  a

                                                            race            single         licence for horse                  circumstances        so                 7.49

                                                                            transaction racing or for                         necessitate, more than

                                                                            > ` 10,000. arranging for                         one horse race.

                                                                                           wagering      or

                                                                                           betting in any

                                                                                           race course.                                                               a
                                                            a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section     Nature of    Threshold        Payer         Payee  Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                               payment       Limit for                              TDS deduction
                                                                          deduction of
                                                                          tax at source                                                                           a

                                                   194D Insurance         Amount or Any person Any                2%, if the At the time                          7.50
                                                             Commission
                                                                          aggregate responsible for Resident      payee is of credit of

                                                                          amount > paying            any          non-    such

                                                                          ` 20,000 in a income by way             corporate income to

                                                                          F.Y.           of                       resident the

                                                                                         remuneration             10%, if the account of

                                                                                         or reward for            payee is the payee                              INCOME TAX LAW

                                                                                         soliciting or            domestic or at the

                                                                                         procuring                company time         of

                                                                                         insurance                        payment,

                                                                                         business                         whichever

                                                                                         (including the                   is earlier.

                                                                                         business

                                                                                         relating to the

                                                                                         continuance,

                                                                                         renewal       or

                                                                                         revival       of

                                                                                         policies      of

                                                                                         insurance)

                                                   194DA Any   sum Amount or Any person Any                       2% of the At the time Exemption from TDS

                                                            under a Life aggregate responsible for resident       amount of of payment The sum received under a

                                                            Insurance amount  paying any sum                      income                   life insurance policy
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section  Nature of        Threshold    Payer              Payee      Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                            payment           Limit for                                   TDS deduction
                                                                           deduction of
                                                                           tax at source

                                                            Policy not ` 1,00,000 in under a LIP,                       comprised              which       fulfills    the
                                                                                                                          therein.
                                                            fulfilling the a financial including the                                           conditions         specified

                                                            conditions year               sum allocated                                        under section 10(10D).

                                                            specified u/s                 by way of

                                                            10(10D)                       bonus                                                                               ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                   194G Commission > ` 20,000 Any person Any                            2% At             the Where income is

                                                            on sale of in a F.Y.          responsible for person                    time of credited to some other

                                                            lottery                       paying    any stocking,                   credit of account, whether called

                                                            tickets                       income by way distributin                 such       "Suspense account" or

                                                                                          of commission, g,                         income to by any other name, in

                                                                                          remuneration purchasin                    the        the books of account of

                                                                                          or prize (by g            or              account of the person liable to pay

                                                                                          whatever name selling                     the payee such income, such

                                                                                          called)   on lottery                      or at the crediting shall be

                                                                                          lottery tickets tickets                   time of deemed to be credit to

                                                                                                                                    payment, the account of the

                                                                                                                                    whichever payee for the purposes            a

                                                                                                                                    is earlier. of this section.              7.51

                                                   194-IA Payment on  ` 50 lakh Any person, Resident                    1% of At the time Meaning of consideration

                                                            transfer of (Consideration being        a transferor        consideration of credit of for transfer of immovable

                                                            certain        for transfer transferee                      for transfer such sum property

                                                            immovable or stamp (other than a                            or stamp to       the                                 a
                                                            a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section     Nature of    Threshold           Payer         Payee  Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                               payment       Limit for                                 TDS deduction
                                                                          deduction of
                                                                          tax at source                                                                                    a

                                                            property other duty value)   person referred             duty value, account of Consideration for transfer of  7.52
                                                            than
                                                            agricultural                 to in section               whichever the     immovable property include
                                                            land
                                                                                         194LA                       is higher. transferor all charges of the nature of

                                                                                         responsible for             No or at the club membership fee, car

                                                                                         paying                      requirement time  of parking fee, electricity or

                                                                                         compensation                of     payment, water  facility        fee,

                                                                                         for compulsory              obtaining whichever maintenance fee, advance          INCOME TAX LAW

                                                                                         acquisition of              TAN u/s is earlier. fee or any other charges of

                                                                                         immovable                   203A.             similar nature, which are
                                                                                                                                       incidental to transfer of the
                                                                                         property other

                                                                                         than          rural                           immovable property.

                                                                                         agricultural                                  It is clarified, that where
                                                                                                                                       there is more than one
                                                                                         land)                                         transferor or transferee in

                                                                                                                                       respect of any immovable
                                                                                                                                       property, then the
                                                                                                                                       consideration shall be the
                                                                                                                                       aggregate of amount paid
                                                                                                                                       or payable by all the
                                                                                                                                       transferees to the
                                                                                                                                       transferor or all the
                                                                                                                                       transferors for transfer of

                                                                                                                                       such immovable property.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section  Nature of        Threshold    Payer              Payee  Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                            payment           Limit for                               TDS deduction
                                                                           deduction of
                                                                           tax at source

                                                   194K     Income on Amount or Any person Any                      10%  At the time

                                                            units other aggregate responsible for resident               of credit of

                                                            than in the amount > paying              any                 such sum

                                                            nature        of ` 10,000 in a income        in              to  the

                                                            capital gains F.Y.            respect of units               account of                                 ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                                                          of a mutual                    the payee

                                                                                          fund/                          or at the

                                                                                          Administrator                  time of

                                                                                          of the specified               payment,

                                                                                          undertaking/                   whichever

                                                                                          specified                      is earlier.

                                                                                          company

                                                   194LA Compensation Amount or Any person Any                      10%  At the time TDS provisions are not

                                                            on acquisition aggregate responsible for Resident            of payment applicable          on

                                                            of certain amount > paying any sum                                         compensation     on

                                                            immovable ` 5,00,000 in in the nature of                                   acquisition of agricultural

                                                            property       a F.Y.         compensation                                 land in India, whether

                                                            (other than                   or enhanced                                  rural or urban.                a

                                                            agricultural                  compensation                                                              7.53

                                                            land situated                 on compulsory

                                                            in India)                     acquisition of

                                                                                          immovable

                                                                                          property (other                                                           a
                                                            a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section     Nature of    Threshold         Payer         Payee      Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                               payment       Limit for                                   TDS deduction
                                                                          deduction of
                                                                          tax at source                                                                          a

                                                                                          than                                                                   7.54
                                                                                          agricultural
                                                                                          land situated in
                                                                                          India)

                                                   194P     Pension       Basic           Notified          Specified    Rates in    Specified senior citizen
                                                                                                                          force,
                                                            (along with exemption specified bank senior                              means an individual,
                                                                                                                       where the
                                                            interest on limit             (a  banking citizen          individual    being a resident in India,  INCOME TAX LAW

                                                            bank account) [` 4,00,000 (in company which                     has      who ­
                                                                                                                        exercised
                                                                          case       the is a scheduled                the option    - is of the age of 75
                                                                                                                       of shifting
                                                                          specified       bank and has                 out of the    years or more at any
                                                                                                                       default tax
                                                                          senior citizen been appointed                  regime.     time during the P.Y.;

                                                                          pays tax under as agents of RBI                  Rates     - is having pension
                                                                                                                       specified in
                                                                          the default tax u/s 45 of the                              income and no other
                                                                                                                         section
                                                                          regime u/s RBI Act, 1934                       115BAC,     income    except
                                                                                                                       where the
                                                                          115BAC),                                      individual   interest  income
                                                                                                                         pays tax
                                                                          ` 3,00,000 /                                               received or receivable

                                                                          ` 5,00,000, as                                             from any account

                                                                          the case may                                               maintained by such

                                                                          be, if the                                                 individual in the same

                                                                          specified                                                  specified bank in

                                                                          senior citizen                                             which he is receiving

                                                                          has exercised                                              his pension income;

                                                                          the option of                                              and
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section  Nature of    Threshold       Payer  Payee  Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                            payment       Limit for                      TDS deduction
                                                                       deduction of
                                                                       tax at source

                                                                       shifting out of                 under the    - has furnished a
                                                                                                       default tax       declaration to the
                                                                       the default tax                                   specified bank.
                                                                                                         regime.
                                                                       regime                                       Specified bank to compute
                                                                                                                    the total income for the
                                                                       providing u/s                                relevant A.Y. of the specified
                                                                                                                    senior citizen who furnishes
                                                                       115BAC] [i.e.,                               declaration in prescribed       ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS
                                                                                                                    form, and deduct income-
                                                                       total income                                 tax, after giving effect to
                                                                                                                    deduction under Chapter
                                                                       after giving                                 VI-A, if any allowable (on
                                                                                                                    the basis of evidence
                                                                       effect to the                                furnished by the specified
                                                                                                                    senior citizen) and rebate
                                                                       deduction                                    allowable
                                                                                                                    u/s 87A.
                                                                       allowable                                    [CBDT Notification No.
                                                                                                                    99/2021 dated 2.9.2021]
                                                                       under Chapter                                The provisions of section
                                                                                                                    139, relating to filing of
                                                                       VI-A, if any                                 return, would not apply
                                                                                                                    to a specified senior
                                                                       allowable

                                                                       should exceed

                                                                       the        basic

                                                                       exemption

                                                                       limit. Further,

                                                                       in case the                                                                    a

                                                                       individual is                                                                7.55

                                                                       entitled to

                                                                       rebate u/s 87A

                                                                       from       tax

                                                                       payable, then                                                                a
                                                            a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section     Nature of    Threshold         Payer           Payee  Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                               payment       Limit for                                 TDS deduction
                                                                          deduction of
                                                                          tax at source                                                                                  a

                                                                          the   same                                           citizen for the A.Y.                      7.56

                                                                          should be                                            relevant to the P.Y. in

                                                                          given effect                                         which tax has been

                                                                          to]                                                  deducted u/s 194P(1).

                                                   194Q Purchase    of > ` 50 lakhs Buyer, who is Any                0.1% of At the time Non-applicability of TDS
                                                             goods
                                                                          in a previous responsible for resident     sum of credit of u/s 194Q

                                                                          year           paying any sum to           exceeding such sum to Transactions on which         INCOME TAX LAW

                                                                                         any resident for            ` 50 lakhs the account (a) Tax is deductible under

                                                                                         purchase         of         of the seller any of the provisions of

                                                                                         goods.                      or at the the Act;

                                                                                         Buyer means a               time      of (b) Tax is collectible u/s

                                                                                         person whose                payment,  206C

                                                                                         total sales, gross          whichever is Other points

                                                                                         receipts         or         earlier.  Where the sum is credited

                                                                                         turnover from                         to any account, whether

                                                                                         business exceeds                      called "Suspense account"

                                                                                         ` 10 crores during                    or by any other name, in the

                                                                                         the              FY                   books of account of the

                                                                                         immediately                           person liable to pay such

                                                                                         preceding the FY                      income, such crediting shall

                                                                                         in which the                          be deemed to be credit to

                                                                                         purchase of goods                     the account of the payee for

                                                                                         is carried out.                       the purposes of this section.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section  Nature of           Threshold          Payer          Payee  Rate of Time of Other relevant points
                                                            payment              Limit for                                 TDS deduction
                                                                              deduction of
                                                                              tax at source

                                                   194R     Any benefit Value        or Any person Any                   10% of Before   Where the benefit or

                                                            or perquisite, aggregate of (other than an resident          value or providing perquisite is wholly in

                                                            whether           value  of individual or                    aggregate such  kind or partly in cash and

                                                            convertible benefit or HUF                 whose             of value of benefit or partly in kind but the part

                                                            into money or perquisite > total              sales,         such perquisite in cash is not sufficient to        ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                            not, arising ` 20,000 in a gross receipts                    benefit or      meet the liability of

                                                            from business F.Y.               or       turnover           perquisite      deduction of tax in

                                                            or           the                 does         not                            respect of whole of such

                                                            exercise of a                    exceed                                      benefit or perquisite, the

                                                            profession.                      ` 1 crore in                                person responsible for

                                                            The                              case         of                             providing such benefit or

                                                            provisions                       business     or                             perquisite shall, before

                                                            would apply                      ` 50 lakhs in                               releasing the benefit or

                                                            to any benefit                   case         of                             perquisite, ensure that

                                                            or perquisite,                   profession                                  tax has been paid in

                                                            whether in                       during       the                            respect of the benefit or

                                                            cash or in                       immediately                                 perquisite.

                                                            kind or partly                   preceding F.Y.)                                                                   a

                                                            in cash and                      responsible for                                                                 7.57

                                                            partly in kind.                  providing to a

                                                                                             resident, any

                                                                                             benefit      or

                                                                                             perquisite.                                                                     a
                                                            a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section     Nature of    Threshold    Payer             Payee  Rate of   Time of      Other relevant points
                                                               payment       Limit for                              TDS    deduction
                                                                          deduction of
                                                                          tax at source                             10%                                         a

                                                                                         In case of a                                                           7.58

                                                                                         company,

                                                                                         "person

                                                                                         responsible for

                                                                                         paying" means

                                                                                         the company

                                                                                         itself including                                                       INCOME TAX LAW

                                                                                         the Principal

                                                                                         Officer thereof.

                                                   194T     Any sum in Sum      or Any person, Partner of                  At the time

                                                            the nature of aggregate of being a firm such firm              of credit of

                                                            salary,       such sum >                                       such sum

                                                            remuneration, `     20,000                                     to  the

                                                            commission, during the                                         account of

                                                            bonus      or F.Y.                                             the partner

                                                            intertest                                                      (including

                                                                                                                           the capital

                                                                                                                           account)

                                                                                                                           or at the

                                                                                                                           time of

                                                                                                                           payment,

                                                                                                                           whichever

                                                                                                                           is earlier.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a 7.59  a

ILLUSTRATION 10

Examine the applicability of the provisions for tax deduction at source under section
194DA in the following cases -

(i) Mr. X, a resident, is due to receive ` 4.50 lakhs on 30.6.2025, towards maturity
       proceeds of LIC policy taken on 1.7.2022, for which the sum assured is ` 4
       lakhs and the annual premium is ` 1,25,000.

(ii) Mr. Y, a resident, is due to receive ` 3.95 lakhs on 31.12.2025 on LIC policy
       taken on 1.1.2012, for which the sum assured is ` 3.50 lakhs and the annual
       premium is ` 26,100.

(iii) Mr. Z, a resident, is due to receive ` 95,000 on 1.8.2025 towards maturity
       proceeds of LIC policy taken on 31.7.2017 for which the sum assured is
       ` 90,000 and the annual premium was ` 10,000.

SOLUTION

(i) Since the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of a
       policy taken after 31.3.2012, the maturity proceeds of ` 4.50 lakhs due on
       30.6.2025 are not exempt under section 10(10D) in the hands of Mr. X.
       Therefore, tax is required to be deducted@2% under section 194DA on the
       amount of income comprised therein i.e., on ` 75,000 (` 4,50,000, being
       maturity proceeds - ` 3,75,000, being the aggregate amount of insurance
       premium paid).

(ii) Since the annual premium is less than 20% of sum assured in respect of a
       policy taken before 1.4.2012, the sum of ` 3.95 lakhs due to Mr. Y would be
       exempt under section 10(10D) in his hands. Hence, no tax is required to be
       deducted at source under section 194DA on such sum payable to Mr. Y.

(iii) Even though the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of
       a policy taken after 31.3.2012, and consequently, the maturity proceeds of
       ` 95,000 due on 1.8.2025 would not be exempt under section 10(10D) in the
       hands of Mr. Z, the tax deduction provisions under section 194DA are not
       attracted since the maturity proceeds are less than ` 1 lakh.

ILLUSTRATION 11

Mr. X sold his house property in Bangalore as well as his rural agricultural land for
a consideration of ` 60 lakh and ` 15 lakh, respectively, to Mr. Y on 1.8.2025. He
has purchased the house property and the land in the year 2024 for ` 40 lakh and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.60  INCOME TAX LAW

` 10 lakh, respectively. The stamp duty value on the date of transfer, i.e., 1.8.2025,
is ` 85 lakh and ` 20 lakh for the house property and rural agricultural land,
respectively. Examine the tax implications in the hands of Mr. X and Mr. Y and the
TDS implications, if any, in the hands of Mr. Y, assuming that both Mr. X and Mr. Y
are resident Indians.

SOLUTION

 (i) Tax implications in the hands of Mr. X

          As per section 50C, the stamp duty value of house property (i.e. ` 85 lakh)
          would be deemed to be the full value of consideration arising on transfer
          of property, since the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the
          consideration received. Therefore, ` 45 lakh (i.e., ` 85 lakh ­ ` 40 lakh,
          being the purchase price) would be taxable as short-term capital gains in
          the A.Y.2026-27.
          Since rural agricultural land is not a capital asset, the gains arising on sale
          of such land is not taxable in the hands of Mr. X.

 (ii) Tax implications in the hands of Mr. Y

          In case immovable property is received for inadequate consideration, the
          difference between the stamp value and actual consideration would be
          taxable under section 56(2)(x), if such difference exceeds the higher of
          ` 50,000 and 10% of the consideration.
          Therefore, in this case ` 25 lakh (` 85 lakh ­ ` 60 lakh) would be taxable in
          the hands of Mr. Y under section 56(2)(x).
          Since agricultural land is not a capital asset, the provisions of section
          56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of receipt of agricultural land for
          inadequate consideration, since the definition of "property" under section
          56(2)(x) includes only capital assets specified thereunder.

 (iii) TDS implications in the hands of Mr. Y

          Since the sale consideration of house property or the stamp duty value of
          house property exceeds ` 50 lakh, Mr. Y is required to deduct tax at
          source under section 194-IA. The tax to be deducted under section 194-IA
          would be ` 85,000, being 1% of ` 85 lakhs (higher of ` 60 lakhs or ` 85
          lakhs).
          TDS provisions under section 194-IA are not attracted in respect of
          transfer of rural agricultural land.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                    ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS              a         7.61     a

ILLUSTRATION 12

Mr. Sharma, a resident Indian aged 77 years, gets pension of ` 82,000 per month
from the UP State Government. The same is credited to his savings account in
SBI, Lucknow Branch. In addition, he gets interest@8% p.a. on fixed deposit of
` 40 lakh with the said bank. Out of the deposit of ` 40 lakh, ` 2 lakh represents
five year term deposit made by him on 1.4.2025. Interest on savings bank credited
to his SBI savings account for the P.Y.2025-26 is ` 9,500.

(1) From the above facts, compute the total income and tax liability of
       Mr. Sharma for the A.Y. 2026-27, assuming that he has exercised the option of
       shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(2) What would be the amount of tax deductible at source by SBI, assuming that
       the same is a specified bank? Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of income
       for A.Y.2026-27, if tax deductible at source has been fully deducted? Examine.

(3) Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of income for A.Y. 2026-27, if the
       fixed deposit of ` 40 lakh was with Canara Bank instead of SBI, other facts
       remaining the same?

SOLUTION

(1)       Computation of total income of Mr. Sharma for A.Y.2026-27

                    Particulars                           `               `

     I    Salaries

          Pension (` 82,000 x 12)                         9,84,000
                                                            50,000
          Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia)

                                                                    9,34,000

     II Income from Other Sources                         3,20,000
              Interest on fixed deposit (` 40 lakh x 8%)      9,500 3,29,500
                                                                        12,63,500
          Interest on savings account

     Gross total income                            lakh,  1,50,000
     Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A

              Under Section 80C
              Five year term deposit (` 2
              restricted to ` 1.5 lakh)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.62  INCOME TAX LAW

         Under section 80TTB                         50,000 2,00,000
         Interest on fixed deposit and savings                   10,63,500
         account, restricted to 50,000, since
         Mr. Sharma is a resident Indian of the age
         of 77 years.

Total Income

         Computation of tax liability for A.Y.2026-27

                                 Particulars              `
Tax payable [` 63,500 x 30% + ` 1,10,000]              1,29,050
Add: Health and Education Cess@4%
Tax liability                                               5,162
Tax liability (rounded off)                            1,34,212
                                                       1,34,210

(2) SBI, being a specified bank, is required to deduct tax at source u/s 194P and
       remit the same to the Central Government. In such a case, Mr. Sharma
       would not be required to file his return of income u/s 139.

(3) If the fixed deposit of ` 40 lakh is with a bank other than SBI, which is the
       bank where his pension is credited, then, Mr. Sharma would not qualify as a
       "specified senior citizen". In this case, Mr. Sharma would have to file his
       return of income u/s 139, since his total income (without giving effect to
       deduction under Chapter VI-A) exceeds the basic exemption limit.

ILLUSTRATION 13
Mr. Gupta, a resident Indian, is in retail business and his turnover for F.Y.202 4-25
was ` 12 crores. He regularly purchases goods from another resident, Mr. Agarwal,
a wholesaler, and the aggregate payments during the F.Y.2025-26 was ` 95 lakh
(` 20 lakh on 1.6.2025, ` 25 lakh on 12.8.2025, ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2025 and ` 28
lakh on 25.3.2026). Assume that the said amounts were credited to Mr. Agarwal's
account in the books of Mr. Gupta on the same date.

(1) Based on the above facts, examine the TDS implications, if any, under the
       Income-tax Act, 1961.

(2) Would your answer be different if Mr. Gupta's turnover for F.Y.2024-25 was
       ` 8 crores, all other facts remaining the same?

(3) Would your answer to (1), if PAN has not been furnished by the seller, as
       required?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.63  a

SOLUTION

(1) Since Mr. Gupta's turnover for F.Y.2024-25 exceeds 10 crores, and payments
       made by him to Mr. Agarwal, a resident seller exceed ` 50 lakhs in the
       P.Y.2025-26, he is liable to deduct tax@0.1% of ` 45 lakhs (being the sum
       exceeding ` 50 lakhs) in the following manner ­

       No tax is to be deducted u/s 194Q on the payments made on 1.6.2025 and
       12.8.2025, since the aggregate payments till that date i.e. 45 lakhs, has not
       exceeded the threshold of ` 50 lakhs.

       Tax of ` 1,700 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 17 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from
       the payment/ credit of ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2025 [` 22 lakh ­ ` 5 lakhs, being
       the balance unexhausted threshold limit].

       Tax of ` 2,800 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from
       the payment/ credit of ` 28 lakhs on 25.3.2026.

(2) If Mr. Gupta's turnover for the F.Y.2024-25 was only ` 8 crores, TDS
       provisions under section 194Q would not be attracted.

(3) In case (1), if PAN is not furnished by Mr. Agarwal to Mr. Gupta, then,
       Mr. Gupta has to deduct tax@5%, instead of 0.1%. Accordingly, tax of
       ` 85,000 (i.e., 5% of ` 17 lakhs) and ` 1,40,000 (5% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be
       deducted by Mr. Gupta u/s 194Q on 23.11.2025 and 25.3.2026, respectively.

3.13 Income payable "net of tax" [Section 195A]

(1) Where, under an agreement or other arrangement, the tax chargeable on
       any income referred to in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter is to be
       borne by the person by whom the income is payable, then, for the purposes
       of deduction of tax under those provisions such income shall be increased
       to such amount as would, after deduction of tax thereon, be equal to the
       net amount payable under such agreement or arrangement.

(2) However, no grossing up is required in the case of tax paid under section
       192(1A) by an employer on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the
       employee.

(3) When an amount is paid net of tax, the taxability has to be calculated by
       grossing up the amount, since the tax itself represents the income of the
       payee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.64  INCOME TAX LAW

3.14 Interest or dividend or other sums payable to
      Government, Reserve Bank or certain corporations
      [Section 196]

(1) No deduction of tax shall be made by any person from any sums payable to -

       (i) the Government; or
       (ii) the Reserve Bank of India; or
       (iii) a corporation established by or under a Central Act, which is, under any

               law for the time being in force, exempt from income-tax on its income; or
       (iv) a Mutual Fund1.
(2) This provision for non-deduction is applicable when such sum is payable to
       the above entities by way of -

       (i) interest or dividend in respect of securities or shares -
               (a) owned by the above entities; or
               (b) in which they have full beneficial interest or

       (ii) any income accruing or arising to them.

    4. CERTIFICATE FOR DEDUCTION OF TAX AT A
          LOWER RATE [SECTION 197]

(1) This section applies where, in the case of any income of any person or sum
       payable to any person, income-tax is required to be deducted at the time of
       credit or payment, as the case may be, at the rates in force as per the
       provisions of sections 192, 193, 194, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194-I,
       194J, 194K, 194LA, 194M and 194Q.

(2) In such cases, the assessee can make an application to the Assessing Officer
       for deduction of tax at a lower rate or for non-deduction of tax.

(3) If the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the total income of the recipient
       justifies the deduction of income-tax at lower rates or no deduction of
       income-tax, as the case may be, he may give to the assessee such
       certificate, as may be appropriate.

1 Specified under section 10(23D)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.65  a

(4) Where the Assessing Officer issues such a certificate, then the person
       responsible for paying the income shall deduct income-tax at such lower
       rates specified in the certificate or deduct no tax, as the case may be, until
       such certificate is cancelled by the Assessing Officer.

(5) Enabling powers have been conferred upon the CBDT to make rules for
       prescribing the procedure in this regard.

    5. NO DEDUCTION IN CERTAIN CASES
          [SECTION 197A]

(1) Enabling provision for filing of declaration for receipt of dividend
       without deduction of tax [Sub-section (1)]

       (i) This section enables an individual, who is resident in India, to receive
               dividend without deduction of tax at source under section 194 on
               furnishing a declaration in duplicate in the prescribed form [Form 15G]
               and verified in the prescribed manner.

       (ii) The declaration in the above form is to be furnished in writing in
               duplicate by the declarant to the person responsible for paying any
               income of the nature referred to in section 194. The declaration will
               have to be to the effect that the tax on the estimated total income of
               the declarant of the previous year in which such income is to be
               included in computing his total income will be Nil.

(2) Enabling provision for filing of declaration for non-deduction of tax
       under section 192A or 193 or 194A or 194D or 194DA or 194-I or 194K
       by persons, other than companies and firms [Sub-section (1A)]

       No deduction of tax shall be made under the above provisions of the Act,
       where a person, who is not a company or a firm, furnishes to the person
       responsible for paying any income of the nature referred to in these
       sections, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form [Form
       15G] to the effect that the tax on his estimated total income of the previous
       year in which such income is to be included in computing his total income
       will be Nil.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.66  INCOME TAX LAW

(3) Filing declaration not permissible if income/aggregate of incomes
       exceed basic exemption limit [Sub-section (1B)]

       Declaration cannot be furnished as per the above provisions, where -

       (i) payments of dividend; or

       (ii) payment of premature withdrawal from Employee Provident Fund; or

       (iii) income from interest on securities or

       (iv) interest other than "interest on securities" or units; or

       (v) insurance commission; or

       (vi) payment in respect of life insurance policy; or

       (vii) rent; or

       (viii) income from units; or

       (ix) the aggregate of the amounts of such incomes in (i) to (viii) above

       credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the previous year in
       which such income is to be included exceeds the basic exemption limit.

(4) Enabling provision for filing of declaration by resident senior citizens
       for non-deduction of tax at source [Sub-section (1C)]

       For a resident individual, who is of the age of 60 years or more at any time
       during the previous year, no deduction of tax shall be made under section
       192A or section 193 or section 194 or section 194A or section 194D or section
       194DA or section 194-I or section 194K, if such individual furnishes a
       declaration in writing in duplicate in Form 15H to the payer, that tax on his
       estimated total income of the previous year in which such income is to be
       included in computing his total income is Nil. The restriction contained in sub-
       section (1B) will not apply to resident senior citizens.

(5) Non-deduction of tax in certain cases

       Payments to notified person or class of persons including
       institutions/class of institutions etc. [Sub-section (1F)]

       No deduction of tax shall be made or deduction of tax shall be made at
       such lower rate, from such payment to such person or class of persons,
       including institution, association or body or class of institutions or
       associations or bodies as may be notified by the Central Government in the
       Official Gazette in this behalf. Therefore, in respect of such payments made

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.67  a

       to notified person or class of persons, no tax is to be deducted at source or
       tax is to be deducted at lower rate.

(6) Time limit for delivery of one copy of declaration [Sub-section (2)]

       On receipt of the declaration referred to in sub-sections (1), (1A) or (1C), the
       person responsible for making the payment will be required to deliver or
       cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
       Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, one copy of the
       declaration on or before the 7th of the month following the month in
        which the declaration is furnished to him.

    6. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

6.1 Tax deducted is income received [Section 198]

(1) All sums deducted in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall, for the
       purpose of computing the income of an assessee, be deemed to be income
       received.

(2) However, the following tax paid or deducted would not be deemed to be income
       received by the assessee for the purpose of computing the total income ­
       (i) the tax paid by an employer under section 192(1A) on non-monetary
               perquisites provided to the employees
       (ii) tax deducted under section 194N

6.2 Credit for tax deducted at source [Section 199]

(1) Tax deducted at source in accordance with the above provisions and paid to
       the credit of the Central Government shall be treated as payment of tax on
       behalf of the-
       (i) person from whose income the deduction was made; or
       (ii) owner of the security; or
       (iii) depositor; or
       (iv) owner of property; or
       (v) unit-holder; or
       (vi) shareholder.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.68  INCOME TAX LAW

(2) Any sum referred to in section 192(1A) and paid to the Central Government,
       shall be treated as the tax paid on behalf of the person in respect of whose
       income, such payment of tax has been made.

(3) The CBDT is empowered to frame rules for the purpose of giving credit in
       respect of tax deducted or tax paid under Chapter XVII. The CBDT also has
       the power to make rules for giving credit to a person other than the persons
       mentioned in (1) and (2) above. Further, the CBDT can specify the
       assessment year for which such credit may be given.

6.3 Duty of person deducting tax [Section 200]

(1) The persons responsible for deducting the tax at source should deposit the
       sum so deducted to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board
       directs, within the prescribed time.

(2) Further, an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites provided to
       employees in accordance with section 192(1A), should deposit within the
       prescribed time, the tax to the credit of the Central Government or as the
       Board directs.

(3) Rule 30 prescribes the time and mode of payment to Government account
       of TDS or tax paid under section 192(1A) and Rule 31A provides for
       submission of quarterly statements by every person responsible for
       deduction of tax [depicted in the diagram given in page 7.72]

       However, every person responsible for deduction of tax under section 194-
       IA, 194-IB or 194M have to furnish to the Principal Director General of
       Income-tax (Systems) (in case of sections 194-IB and 194M) or Director
       General of Income-tax (System) or the person authorised by them, a
       challan-cum-statement in Form No.26QB, 26QC or 26QD respectively, within
       thirty days from the end of the month of deduction of tax.

6.4 Correction of arithmetic mistakes and adjustment of
      incorrect claim during computerized processing of TDS
      and other statements [Section 200A]

(1) At present, all statements of tax deducted at source are filed in an electronic
       mode, thereby facilitating computerised processing of these statements.
       Therefore, in order to process TDS statements on computer, electronic
       processing on the same lines as processing of income-tax returns has been
       provided in section 200A.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.69  a

(2) The following adjustments can be made during the computerized processing of
       statement of tax deducted at source or a correction statement ­

       (i) any arithmetical error in the statement; or

       (ii) an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any
               information in the statement.

(3) The term "an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the
       statement" shall mean such claim on the basis of an entry, in the
       statement,­

       (i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same or
               some other item in such statement;

       (ii) in respect of rate of deduction of tax at source, where such rate is not
               in accordance with the provisions of the Act.

(4) The interest, if any, has to be computed on the basis of the sums deductible
       as computed in the statement;

(5) The fee, if any, has to be computed in accordance with the provision of
       section 234E. A fee of ` 200 for every day would be levied under section
       234E for late furnishing of TDS statement from the due date of furnishing of
       TDS statement to the date of furnishing of TDS/ statement. However, the total
       amount of fee shall not exceed the total amount of tax deductible/collectible
       and such fee has to be paid before delivering the TDS statement.

(6) The sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the deductor has to
       be determined after adjustment of interest and fee against the amount paid
       under section 200 or section 201 or section 234E and any amount paid
       otherwise by way of tax or interest or fee.

(7) An intimation will be prepared and generated and sent to the deductor,
       specifying his tax liability or the refund due, within one year from the end of
       the financial year in which the statement is filed. The refund due shall be
       granted to the deductor.

(8) For this purpose, the CBDT is empowered to make a scheme for centralized
       processing of statements of TDS to determine the tax payable by, or refund
       due to, the deductor.

(9) The Board may make a scheme for processing of statements made by any
       other person, not being a deductor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.70  INCOME TAX LAW

6.5 Consequences of failure to deduct or pay [Section 201]

(1) Deemed assessee-in-default

       Any person including the principal officer of a company -

       (i) who is required to deduct any sum in accordance with the provisions
               of the Act; or

       (ii) an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section 192(1A).

       shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-default, if he does not deduct, or
       does not pay or after deducting, fails to pay, the whole or any part of the
       tax, as required by or under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

(2) Non-applicability of deeming provision

       Any person (including the principal officer of the company) who fails to
       deduct the whole or any part of the tax on the amount credited or paid to a
       payee shall not be deemed to be an assessee-in-default in respect of such
       tax if such payee ­

       (i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;

       (ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return
               of income; and

       (iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income,

       and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in
       such form as may be prescribed.

(3) Interest Liability

       (i) A person deemed to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1), for
               failure to deduct tax or to pay the tax after deduction, is liable to pay
               simple interest @ 1% for every month or part of month on the amount
               of such tax from the date on which tax was deductible to the date on
               which such tax was actually deducted and simple interest @ 1½% for
               every month or part of month from the date on which tax was deducted
               to the date on which such tax is actually paid [Section 201(1A)].

       (ii) Such interest should be paid before furnishing the statements in
               accordance with section 200(3).

       (iii) Where the payer fails to deduct the whole or any part of the tax on
               the amount credited or payment made to a payee and is not deemed
               to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1) on account of
               payment of taxes by such payee, interest under section 201(1A)(i)
               i.e.,@1% p.m. or part of month, shall be payable by the payer from the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.71  a

               date on which such tax was deductible to the date of furnishing of
               return of income by such payee. The date of deduction and payment
               of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be the date on which return
               of income has been furnished by the payee.

               However, where an order is made by the Assessing Officer for
               assessee-in-default, the interest shall be paid by the person in
               accordance with such order.

       (iv) Where the tax has not been paid after it is deducted, the amount of the
               tax together with the amount of simple interest thereon shall be a charge
               upon all the assets of the person or the company, as the case may be.

6.6 Certificate for tax deducted [Section 203]

(1) Every person deducting tax at source have to issue a certificate to the effect
       that tax has been deducted and specify the amount so deducted, the rate at
       which tax has been deducted and such other particulars as may be prescribed.

(2) Every person, being an employer, referred to in section 192(1A) shall, within
       such period, as may be prescribed, furnish to the person in respect of whose
       income such payment of tax has been made, a certificate to the effect that
       tax has been paid to the Central Government, and specify the amount so
       paid, the rate at which the tax has been paid and such other particulars as
       may be prescribed.

(3) Certificate of TDS to be furnished under section 203 [Rule 31]

       The certificate of deduction of tax at source to be furnished under section
       203 shall be in Form No.16 in respect of tax deducted or paid under section
       192 and section 194P and in any other case, Form No.16A.

       Form No.16 shall be issued to the employee annually by 15th June of the
       financial year immediately following the financial year in which the income
       was paid and tax deducted. Form No.16A shall be issued quarterly within 15
       days from the due date for furnishing the statement of TDS under Rule 31A.

       Form No. 16B, 16C or 16D shall be issued by the every person responsible
       for deduction of tax under section 194-IA, 194-IB or 194M to the payee
       within fifteen days from the due date for furnishing the challan-cum-
       statement in Form No. 26QB, 26QC or 26QD, respectively, under rule 31A.

Note ­ The entire TDS process can be understood at a glance from the
diagram given in the next page. The reference to Rules and Forms are only for
the information of students. They are, however, not required to memorize the
Rule numbers and Form numbers for examination purposes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a           7.72                             INCOME TAX LAW

                                         Deduction of tax at source

Sections 193, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194-                Sections 192, 192A, 194, 194B, 194BB, 194DA, 194LA,
       I/IA/IB, 194J, 194K, 194M, 194Q, 194T                                       194N, 194P2, 194R

Deduct tax at the time of credit to the                                          Deduct tax at the time of payment
    a/c of the payee or payment,
         whichever is earlier            Remittance [Rule 30]

Tax deducted by an office of Govt.                                                  Other deductors

  Where tax is    Where tax is paid        (i) Cases (other than     # (ii)          (iii)           (iv)           (iv)
  paid without    accompanied by                (ii), (iii) & (iv)
  production of                                                      u/s             u/s             u/s            u/s
                    an IT challan             Income/Amt is
     challan                                credited or paid in      192/            194-            194-           194M
                   On or before 7        March Any other
On the same day     days from the                                    194A/           IA              IB
                  end of the month                     month
                    of deduction          30th On or before 7        194D/
                                          April days from the
                                                                     194H
                                                     end of the
                                                     month of        Qtly payt              30 days from the end of the
                                                     dedn.            7th July/                 month of deduction
                                                                     7th Oct/ 7th
                                                                     Jan/ 30th

                                                                        April

   PAO/TO/CDDO                                    Furnishing Stt of TDS [Rule 31A]          Rule 31A - Furnish Challan-
                                                                                                  cum-stt in Form
Submit Statement in Form 24G to                   [Form 24Q3/27Q4/26Q5]
agency authorised by PDIT (Sys)                                                             26QB/26QC/26QD with 30
                                                  Qtr ending        Due date                  days from the end of the

                                                  30th June          31st July                  month of deduction

                                                  30th Sep           31st Oct               Rule 31 -Furnish
                                                                                            Certificate to the payee
                                                  31st Dec           31st Jan               within 15 days from the
                                                                                            above due date in Form
                                                  31St March         31st May               16B/16C/16D

 Where            Where Stt                       Furnishing Certificate of TDS
   Stt             relates to                                [Rule 31]
                 other months
relates to                               Deduction u/s 192      Deduction under
 March                                        and 194P           other sections

                                                  Form 16           Form 16A

On or            On or before             By 15th June of the   Within 15 days from
                                         immediately following    the due date for
before           15 days from                                     furnishing TDS
                                                  F.Y.               statement
30th April       end of the

                 relevant month

# In special cases, the A.O. may,

with the prior approval of the JC,

permit quarterly payment of TDS

2 TDS is required to be deducted at the time of payment, if declaration is furnished by the specified senior citizen
3 If deduction of tax is under section 192 or 194P
4 If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of deductee who is a non-corporate non-
resident or a foreign company or RNOR
5 If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of all other deductees

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                         a    7.73               a

6.7 Person responsible for paying taxes deducted at source
      [Section 204]

For purposes of deduction of tax at source the expression "person responsible
for paying" means:

Nature of income/payment                           Person responsible for paying tax

(1) Salary (other than payment of (i) the employer himself; or

salaries by the Central or State (ii) if the employer is a company, the

Government)                                        company itself, including the

                                                   principal officer thereof.

(2) Interest on securities (other than the local authority, corporation or
        payments by or on behalf of the company, including the principal
        Central or State Government) officer thereof.

(3) Any sum payable to a non- the "Authorised Person" responsible for

resident Indian, representing remitting such sum to the non-resident

consideration for the transfer by Indian or for crediting such sum to his

him of any foreign exchange Non-resident (External) Account

asset, which is not a short term maintained in accordance with the

capital asset                                      Foreign Exchange Management Act,

                                                   1999 and any rules made thereunder.

(4) furnishing of information (i) the payer himself; or

relating to payment to a non-                      (ii) if the payer is a company, the
corporate non-resident, or to a                         company itself including the
foreign company, of any sum,                            principal officer thereof.
whether or not chargeable

under the provisions of this Act

(5) Credit/payment of any other (i) the payer himself; or

sum chargeable under the (ii) if the payer is a company, the

provisions of the Act                              company itself including the

                                                   principal officer thereof.

(6) Credit/payment of any sum (i) the drawing and disbursing

chargeable under the provisions                    officer; or

of the Act made by or on behalf (ii) any other person, by whatever

of the Central Government or                       name called, responsible for

the Government of a State.                         crediting, or as the case may be,

                                                   paying such sum.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.74  INCOME TAX LAW

(7) In case of a person not resident (i) the person himself; or

in India (irrespective of the (ii) any person authorized by such

nature of payment or income)                       person; or

                                                   (iii) the agent of such person in India
                                                        including any person treated as an
                                                        agent under section 163.

6.8 Bar against direct demand on assessee [Section 205]

Where tax is deductible at source under any of the aforesaid sections, the
assessee shall not be called upon to pay the tax himself to the extent to which tax
has been deducted from that income.

6.9 Mandatory requirement of furnishing PAN in all TDS
      statements, bills, vouchers and correspondence between
      deductor and deductee [Section 206AA]

(1) The non-furnishing of PAN by deductees in many cases have led to delay in
       issue of refund on account of problems in the processing of returns of
       income and in granting credit for tax deducted at source.

(2) With a view to strengthening the PAN mechanism, section 206AA provides
       that any person whose receipts are subject to deduction of tax at source i.e.
       the deductee, shall mandatorily furnish his PAN to the deductor failing
       which the deductor shall deduct tax at source at higher of the following
       rates ­

       (i) the rate prescribed in the Act;

       (ii) at the rate in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or

       (iii) at the rate of 20%. [5% in case tax is required to be deducted at
               source u/s 194Q]

       For instance, in case of rental payment for plant and machinery, where the
       payee does not furnish his PAN to the payer, tax would be deductible @20%
       instead of @2% prescribed under section 194-I. However, non-furnishing of
       PAN by the deductee in case of income by way of winnings from lotteries,
       card games etc., would result in tax being deducted at the existing rate of
       30% under section 194B. Therefore, wherever tax is deductible at a rate
       higher than 20%, this provision would not have any impact.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.75  a

(3) Tax would be deductible at the rates mentioned above also in cases where
       the taxpayer files a declaration in Form 15G or 15H (under section 197A) but
       does not provide his PAN.

(4) Further, no certificate under section 197 will be granted by the Assessing
       Officer unless the application contains the PAN of the applicant.

(5) Both the deductor and the deductee have to compulsorily quote the PAN of
       the deductee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other documents
       exchanged between them.

(6) If the PAN provided to the deductor is invalid or it does not belong to the
       deductee, it shall be deemed that the deductee has not furnished his PAN to the
       deductor. Accordingly, tax would be deductible at the rate specified in (2) above.

Note: The applicability of provisions of section 206AA on non-resident will be
dealt with at the Final Level.

    7. ADVANCE PAYMENT OF TAX [SECTIONS 207
          TO 219]

7.1 Liability for payment of advance tax

(1) Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year, in accordance
       with the provisions of sections 208 to 219, in respect of an assessee's
       current income i.e. the total income of the assessee which would be
       chargeable to tax for the assessment year immediately following that
       financial year [Section 207].

(2) Under section 208, obligation to pay advance tax arises in every case where
       the advance tax payable is ` 10,000 or more.

       Note - An assessee who is liable to pay advance tax of less than ` 10,000 will
       not be saddled with interest under sections 234B and 234C for defaults in
       payment of advance tax. However, the consequences under section 234A
       regarding interest for belated filing of return would be attracted.

(3) In case of senior citizens who have passive source of income like interest,
       rent, etc., the requirement of payment of advance tax causes genuine
       compliance hardship. Therefore, in order to reduce the compliance burden
       on such senior citizens, exemption from payment of advance tax has been
       provided to a resident individual-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.76  INCOME TAX LAW

(i) not having any income chargeable under the head "Profits and gains
       of business or profession"; and

(ii) of the age of 60 years or more.

Such senior citizens need not pay advance tax and are allowed to discharge
their tax liability (other than TDS) by payment of self-assessment tax.

7.2 Computation of advance tax

(1) An assessee has to estimate his current income and pay advance tax
       thereon. He need not submit any estimate or statement of income to the
       Assessing Officer, except where he has been served with notice by the
       Assessing Officer.

(2) Where an obligation to pay advance tax has arisen, the assessee shall
       himself compute the advance tax payable on his current income at the rates
       in force in the financial year and deposit the same, whether or not he has
       been earlier assessed to tax.

(3) In the case of a person who has been already assessed by way of a regular
       assessment in respect of the total income of any previous year, the
       Assessing Officer, if he is of the opinion that such person is liable to pay
       advance tax, may serve an order under section 210(3) requiring the assessee
       to pay advance tax.

(4) For this purpose, the total income of the latest previous year in respect of
       which the assessee has been assessed by way of regular assessment or the
       total income returned by the assessee in any return of income for any
       subsequent previous year, whichever is higher, shall be taken as the basis
       for computation of advance tax payable.

(5) The above order can be served by the Assessing Officer at any time during
       the financial year but not later than the last date of February.

(6) If, after sending the above notice, but before 1st March of the financial year,
       the assessee furnishes a return relating to any later previous year or an
       assessment is completed in respect of a later return of income, the
       Assessing Officer may amend the order for payment of advance tax on the
       basis of the computation of the income so returned or assessed.

(7) If the assessee feels that his own estimate of advance tax payable would be
       less than the one sent by the Assessing Officer, he can file estimate of his
       current income and advance tax payable thereon.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.77  a

(8) Where the advance tax payable on assessee's estimation is higher than the
       tax computed by the Assessing Officer, then, the advance tax shall be paid
       based upon such higher amount.

(9) In all cases, the tax calculated shall be reduced by the amount of tax
       deductible at source.

       No reduction of `tax deductible but not deducted' while computing
       advance tax liability
       (i) As per the provisions of section 209, the amount of advance tax payable

               by a person is computed by reducing the amount of income-tax which
               would be deductible at source during the financial year from any income
               which has been taken into account in computing the total income.

       (ii) Some courts have opined that in case where the payer pays any
               amount (on which tax is deductible at source) without deduction of
               tax at source, the payee shall not be liable to pay advance tax to the
               extent tax is deductible from such amount.

       (iii) With a view to make such a person (payee) liable to pay advance tax,
               the proviso to section 209(1)(d) provides that the amount of tax
               deductible at source but not so deducted by the payer shall not be
               reduced from the income tax liability of the payee for determining his
               liability to pay advance tax.

       (iv) In effect, only if tax has actually been deducted at source, the same
               can be reduced for computing advance tax liability of the payee. Tax
               deductible but not so deducted cannot be reduced for computing
               advance tax liability of the payee.

(10) The amount of advance tax payable by an assessee in the financial year
       calculated by -

       (i) the assessee himself based on his estimation of current income; or

       (ii) the Assessing Officer as a result of an order under section 210(3) or
               amended order under section 210(4)

       is subject to the provisions of section 209(2), as per which the net
       agricultural income has to be considered for the purpose of computing
       advance tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.78       INCOME TAX LAW

7.3 Instalments of advance tax and due dates

(1) Common advance tax payment schedule for both corporates and non-
       corporates [Other than assessees computing profits on presumptive
       basis under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)]:

Due date of instalment                             Amount payable

On or before 15th June Not less than 15% of advance tax liability

On or before  15th Not less than 45% of advance tax liability, as
September              reduced by the amount, if any, paid in the
                       earlier instalment.

On or before  15th Not less than 75% of advance tax liability, as
December               reduced by the amount or amounts, if any,
                       paid in the earlier instalment or instalments.

On or before 15th March The whole amount of advance tax liability as
                                        reduced by the amount or amounts, if any,
                                        paid in the earlier instalment or instalments.

Note - Any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March
shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending
on 31st March.

(2) Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive
       basis under section 44AD(1)or section 44ADA(1)

       An eligible assessee, opting for computation of profits or gains of business
       on presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section
       44AD(1) or for computation of profits or gains of profession on presumptive
       basis in respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall
       be required to pay advance tax of the whole amount in one instalment on
       or before 15th March of the financial year.

       However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March
       shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending
       on 31st March.

(3) If the last day for payment of any instalment of advance tax is a day on
       which the receiving bank is closed, the assessee can make the payment on
       the next immediately following working day, and in such cases, the interest
       leviable under sections 234B and 234C would not be charged.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.79  a

(4) Where advance tax is payable by virtue of the notice of demand issued6 by
       the Assessing Officer, the whole or the appropriate part of the advance tax
       specified in such notice shall be payable on or before each of such due
       dates as fall after the date of service of notice of demand.

(5) Where the assessee does not pay any instalment by the due date, he shall
       be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such instalment.

7.4 Credit for advance tax [Section 219]

Any sum, other than interest or penalty, paid by or recovered from an assessee
as advance tax, is treated as a payment of tax in respect of the income of the
previous year and credit thereof shall be given in the regular assessment.

7.5 Interest for non-payment or short-payment of advance
      tax [Section 234B]

(1) Interest under section 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or
       payment of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax.

(2) The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from
       1st April following the financial year upto the date of determination of
       income under section 143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, upto
       the date of such regular assessment.

(3) Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the
       assessed tax and the advance tax paid.

(4) Assessed tax is the tax calculated on total income determined under section
       143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, the tax on the total income
       determined under such regular assessment less

       - tax deducted or collected at source.

       - any relief of tax allowed under section 89

       - any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions
               of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting
               out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

       Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) would not include
       the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143.

6 under section 156

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.80             INCOME TAX LAW

       Tax on the total income determined under such regular assessment would
       not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B.

       Section 140B is discussed in detail in Chapter 8.

(5) However, where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee under section
       140A or otherwise, interest shall be calculated upto the date of payment of
       such tax and reduced by the interest, if any, paid under section 140A
       towards the interest chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall
       be calculated at 1% on the amount by which the tax so paid together with
       the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.

7.6 Interest payable for deferment of advance tax
      [Section 234C]

(1) Manner of computation of interest under section 234C for deferment
       of advance tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees:

       In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and
       gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section
       44ADA(1), who is liable to pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to
       pay such tax or the advance tax paid by such assessee on its current income
       on or before the dates specified in column (1) is less than the specified
       percentage [given in column (2)] of tax due on returned income, then
       simple interest@1% per month for the period specified in column (4) on
       the amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable under section 234C.

   Specified   Specified                           Shortfall in advance tax  Period
       date         %
        (1)
               (2)                                 (3)                       (4)
    15th June
               15%                                 15% of tax due on returned 3 months
        15th                                       income (-) advance tax paid up
   September                                       to 15th June

        15th   45%                                 45% of tax due on returned 3 months
   December                                        income (-) advance tax paid up
                                                   to 15th September

               75%                                 75% of tax due on returned 3 months
                                                   income (-) advance tax paid up
                                                   to 15th December

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS               a  7.81                              a

15th March  100%                                   100% of tax due on returned 1 month
                                                   income (-) advance tax paid up
                                                   to 15th March

       Note ­ However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current
       income, on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or
       36% of the tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the assessee
       shall not be liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on
       those dates.

(2) Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee who
       declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section
       44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1):

       In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the
       section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), as the case may be, who is liable to
       pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance
       tax paid by the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is
       less than the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be
       liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall
       from the tax due on the returned income.

(3) Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases:

       Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall
       in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on
       account of under-estimation of or failure to estimate ­

       (i) the amount of capital gains;

       (ii) income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from
               lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;

       (iii) income under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" in cases
               where the income accrues or arises under the said head for the first time.

       (iv) the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred
               u/s 2(22)(e)

       However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax
       payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), as the
       case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.82              INCOME TAX LAW

       the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such
       instalments are due, by 31st March of the financial year.

(4) Meaning of tax due on returned income
       Tax due on returned income means the tax calculated on total income
       declared in the return furnished by the assessee less

       - tax deducted or collected at source

       - any relief of tax allowed under section 89

       - any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions
               of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting
               out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

    8. TAX COLLECTION AT SOURCE

(1) Applicability and Rates
       (i) Sale of certain goods
               Under section 206C(1), sellers of certain goods are required to collect
               tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified percentage for
               collection of tax at source is as follows:

                     Nature of Goods                Percentage

   (a) Alcoholic liquor for human consumption       1%

   (b) Tendu leaves                                 5%

   (c) Timber or any other forest produce (not      2%

   being tendu leaves) obtained under a forest

   lease

   (d) Timber obtained by any mode other than (c)   2%

   (e) Scrap                                        1%

   (f) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore  1%

   The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount
   payable by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such
   amount from the buyer, whichever is earlier.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                                          a  7.83  a

Forest Produce shall have the same meaning as defined in any State Act
for the time being in force, or in the Indian Forest Act, 1927

As per the Indian Forest Act, 1927, forest-produce means:

(a) Whether found Timber, charcoal, caoutchouc, catechu,

in, or brought wood-oil, resin, natural varnish, bark, lac,

from, a forest mahua flowers, mahua seed, kuth and

or not                                             myrabolams

(b) When found in, (1) Trees and leaves, flowers and fruits, and

or       brought all other parts or produce not hereinbefore

from, a forest, mentioned, of trees

that is  (2) plants not being trees (including grass,

                                                   creepers, reeds and moss), and all parts or

                                                   produce of such plants

         (3) wild animals and skins, tusks, horns,
             bones, silk, cocoons, honey and wax, and
             all other parts or produce of animals, and

         (4) peat, surface soil, rock, and minerals
             (including limestone, laterite, mineral oils,
             and all products of mines or quarries)

       Non-applicability of TCS u/s 206C(1) [Section 206C(1A)]

       No collection of tax shall be made under section 206C(1), in the case
       of a resident buyer, if such buyer furnishes to the person responsible
       for collecting tax, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the
       prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner to the effect
       that goods referred to in section 206C(1) above are to be utilised for
       the purpose of manufacturing, processing or producing articles or
       things or for the purposes of generation of power and not for trading
       purposes.

(ii) Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry

       Section 206C(1C) provides for collection of tax by every person who
       grants a lease or a licence or enters into a contract or otherwise
       transfers any right or interest in any

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.84   INCOME TAX LAW

   - parking lot or
   - toll plaza or
   - a mine or a quarry

   to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of
   such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of
   business. The tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or
   lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at
   the rate of 2%.

   Mining and quarrying would not include mining and quarrying of
   mineral oil. Mineral oil includes petroleum and natural gas.

   The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount
   payable by the licensee or lessee to his account or at the time of
   receipt of such amount from the licensee or lessee, whichever is
   earlier.

(iii) Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs

       Section 206C(1F) provides that every person, being a seller, who
       receives any amount as consideration for sale of a motor vehicle of
       the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs, shall, at the time of receipt of such
       amount, collect tax from the buyer@1% of the sale consideration.

        The scope of section 206C(1F) has been expanded to include every
       person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for
       sale of any other notified goods exceeding ` 10 lakhs, to, at the time
       of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the buyer@1% of the sale
       consideration.

   Accordingly, Central Government has, vide notification no. 36/2025
   dated 22nd April 2025, w.e.f. 22.4.2025, notified following goods of the
   value exceeding ` 10 lakh for collection of tax at source:

   S. No                              Nature of goods
     1    Any wrist watch
     2    Any art piece such as antiques, painting, sculpture
     3    Any collectibles such as coin, stamp
     4    Any yacht, rowing boat, canoe, helicopter

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                    a  7.85        a

    5  Any pair of sunglasses

    6  Any bag such as handbag, purse

    7  Any pair of shoes

    8  Any sportswear and equipment such as golf kit, ski-wear

    9  Any home theatre system

             10 Any horse for horse racing in race clubs and horse for polo

(iv) Remittance under LRS of RBI through an authorized dealer or
       purchase of an overseas tour package

       Section 206C(1G) provides for collection of tax by every person,

- being an authorized dealer, who receives amount, under the
       Liberalised Remittance Scheme of the RBI, for remittance from a

       buyer, being a person remitting such amount;

- being a seller of an overseas tour programme package who
       receives any amount from the buyer who purchases the package

Tax has to be collected at the time of debiting the amount payable by
the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said
buyer, by any mode, whichever is earlier.

Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of
an overseas tour programme package

S.     Amount and purpose of remittance               Rate of TCS

No.

(i) Where the amount is for purchase of an 5% till ` 10

       overseas tour programme package                lakhs,      20%

                                                      thereafter

(ii) Where the amount is remitted outside
         India ­

         (a) for the purpose of pursuing any Nil
             education and the amount remitted is
             out of a loan obtained from any
             financial institution as defined in
             section 80E,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.86  INCOME TAX LAW

         (b) for the purpose of education or       5% of the amt
              medical treatment                    or agg. of amts

                                                     in excess of
                                                      ` 10 lakhs

         (c) where the amount is remitted for the  20% of the amt
              purpose other than education or      or agg. of amts
              medical treatment
                                                     in excess of
                                                      ` 10 lakhs

       Cases where no tax is to be collected

         (i) No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of
                which the sum has been collected by the seller

         (ii) No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any
                other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax

         (iii) No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State
                Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a
                commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign
                State, a local authority7 or any other person notified by the
                Central Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions
                stipulated thereunder.

                Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated
                17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G)
                would not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-
                resident in India in terms of section 6 and does not have a
                permanent establishment in India.

(v) Power of the CBDT to issue guidelines

       In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
       section 206C(1G), the CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines, with the
       approval of the Central Government, for the purpose of removing the
       difficulty.

       Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of
       Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on
       the person liable to collect tax.

7 as defined in Explanation to section 10(20)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                                   a            7.87  a

In exercise of the power to issue guidelines, the CBDT has, with the
approval of Central Government, vide this circular, issued the following
guidelines for removing certain difficulties ­

Question 1: Whether the threshold of ` 10 lakhs, for TCS to become
applicable on LRS, applies separately for various purposes like
education, health treatment and others? For example, if remittance of
` 10 lakhs under LRS is made in a financial year for education purpose
and other remittances in the same financial year of ` 10 lakhs is made
for medical treatment and ` 10 lakhs for other purposes, whether the
exemption limit of ` 10 lakhs shall be given to each of the three
separately?

Answer: It is clarified that the threshold of ` 10 lakhs for LRS is
combined threshold for applicability of the TCS on LRS irrespective of
the purpose of the remittance. Thus, in the given example, upto ` 10
lakhs remittance under LRS during a financial year shall not be liable
for TCS. However, subsequent ` 11 lakhs remittance under LRS shall be
liable for TCS in accordance with the TCS rates applicable for such
remittance. TCS rates would be applicable as under:-

Remittances                                                Rate of TCS

First ` 10 lakhs remittance                        No TCS
under LRS during the financial
year 2025-26 for education
purpose (or for that matter
any purpose)

Remittances beyond ` 10 TCS will be Nil (if it is for education

lakhs under LRS during the purpose financed by loan from a

financial year 2025-26                             financial institution), 5% (if it is for

                                                   education or medical treatment)

                                                   and 20% (if it is for other purposes)

Question 2: Whether the threshold of ` 10 lakhs, for TCS to become
applicable on LRS, applies separately for each remittance through
different authorised dealers? If not, how will authorised dealer know
about the earlier remittances by that remitter through some other
authorised dealer?

Answer: It is clarified that the threshold of ` 10 lakhs for LRS is qua
remitter and not qua authorised dealer. Since the facility to provide real

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.88  INCOME TAX LAW

   time update of remittance under LRS by remitter is still under
   development by the RBl, it is clarified that the details of earlier
   remittances under LRS by the remitter during the financial year may be
   taken by the authorised dealer through an undertaking at the time of
   remittance. If the authorised dealer correctly collects the tax at source
   based on information given in this undertaking, he will not be treated
   as "assessee in default". However, for any false information in the
   undertaking, appropriate action may be taken against the remitter
   under the Act.

   It is further clarified that same methodology of taking undertaking from
   the buyer of overseas tour program package may be followed by the
   seller of such package.

   Question 3: There is threshold of ` 10 lakhs for remittance under LRS
   for TCS to become applicable while there is another threshold of ` 10
   lakhs for purchase of overseas tour program package. Whether these
   two thresholds apply independently?

   Answer: Yes, these two thresholds apply independently. For LRS, the
   threshold of ` 10 lakhs applies to make TCS applicable. For purchase of
   overseas tour program package, the threshold of ` 10 lakhs applies to
   determine the applicable TCS rate as 5% or 20%.

   Question 4: A resident individual spends ` 3 lakh for purchase of
   overseas tour program package from a foreign tour operator and remits
   money which is classified under LRS. There is no other remittance under
   LRS or purchase of overseas tour program during the financial year.
   Whether TCS is applicable?

   Answer: ln case of purchase of overseas tour program package which is
   classified under LRS, TCS provision for purchase of overseas tour
   program package shall apply and not TCS provisions for remittance
   under LRS. Since for purchase of overseas tour program package, the
   threshold of ` 10 lakhs for applicability of TCS does not apply, TCS is
   applicable and tax is required to be collected by the seller. ln this case
   the tax shall be required to be collected at 5% since the total amount
   spent on purchase of overseas tour program package during the
   financial year is less than ` 10 lakhs. The TCS should be made by the
   seller.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.89  a

Question 5: There are different rates for remittance under LRS for
medical treatment/education purposes and for other purposes. What is
the scope of remittance under LRS for medical treatment/education
purposes?

Answer: As per the clarification by the RBl, remittance for the purposes
of medical treatment shall include,-

(i) remittance for purchase of tickets of the person to be treated
       medically overseas (and his attendant) for commuting between
       lndia and the overseas destination;

(ii) his medical expense; and

(iii) other day to day expenses required for such purpose.

Education Remittance for purpose of education shall include,-

(i) remittance for purchase of tickets of the person undertaking study
       overseas for commuting between lndia and the overseas
       destination;

(ii) the tuition and other fees to be paid to educational institute; and

(iii) other day to day expenses required for undertaking such study.

Question 6: Whether purchase of international travel ticket or hotel
accommodation on standalone basis is purchase of overseas tour
program package?

Answer: The term 'overseas tour program package' is defined as to
mean any tour package which offers visit to a country or countries or
territory or territories outside lndia and includes expenses for travel or
hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any other expenditure of similar
nature or in relation thereto.

It is clarified that purchase of only international travel ticket or
purchase of only hotel accommodation, by in itself is not covered within
the definition of 'overseas tour program package'. To qualify as
'overseas tour program package', the package should include at least
two of the followings:

(i) international travel ticket,

(ii) hotel accommodation (with or without food)/boarding/lodging,

(iii) any other expenditure of similar nature or in relation thereto.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.90            INCOME TAX LAW

(2) Meaning of certain terms

             Term                                 Meaning

   (i) Overseas    For section 206C(1G)
          tour     Any tour package which offers visit to a country/(ies)
          program  or territory/(ies) outside India. It includes expenses for
          package  travel or hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any
                   other expenditure of similar nature or in relation
                   thereto. [Clause (ii) of Explanation to section 206C(1G)]

   (ii) Buyer      For section 206C(1):
                   A person who obtains in any sale, by way of auction,
                   tender, or any other mode, goods of the nature
                   specified in the Table in point (1) or the right to
                   receive any such goods but does not include ­

                   (A) a public sector company, the Central
                          Government, a State Government, and an
                          embassy, a high commission, legation,
                          commission, consulate and the trade
                          representation, of a foreign State and a club, or

                   (B) a buyer in the retail sale of such goods
                          purchased by him for personal consumption
                          [Explanation to section 206C]

                   For section 206C(1F):
                   A person who obtains in any sale, goods of the nature
                   specified therein, but does not include ­

                   (A) the Central Government, a State Government
                          and an embassy, a High Commission, legation,
                          commission, consulate and the trade
                          representation of a foreign State; or

                   (B) a local authority; or

                   (C) a public sector company which is engaged in the
                          business of carrying passengers. [Explanation to
                          section 206C]

(iii) Seller       For section 206C(1) and section 206C(1F):
                   (i) The Central Government,
                   (ii) a State Government or
                   (iii) any local authority or
                   (iv) corporation or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS               a  7.91  a

(iv) Scrap  (v) authority established by or under a Central, State
                   or Provincial Act, or

            (vi) any company or
            (vii) firm or
            (viii) co-operative society
            Seller also includes an individual or a HUF whose total
            sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or
            profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case
            of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during
            the financial year immediately preceding the financial
            year in which the goods of the nature specified in the
            Table in point (1) are sold.
            [Explanation to section 206C]

            Waste and scrap from the manufacture or mechanical
            working of materials which is definitely not usable as
            such because of breakage, cutting up, wear and other
            reasons. [Explanation to section 206C]

(3) Higher rate of TCS for non-furnishers of PAN [Section 206CC]
       (i) The provisions of section 206CC require tax collection at the higher of
               the following two rates, in case of failure by the person paying any
               sum or amount on which tax is collectible at source (collectee) to
               furnish PAN to the person responsible for collecting tax at source
               (collector) ­

               (a) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act

               (b) at 5%

              However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not
              exceed 20%.

       (ii) Tax would be collectible at the rates mentioned above also in case
               where the person furnishes a declaration under section 206C(1A) but
               does not provide his PAN.

       (iii) Both the collectee and the collector have to compulsorily quote the
               PAN of the collectee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other
               documents exchanged between them.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.92  INCOME TAX LAW

       (iv) If the PAN provided to the collector is invalid or it does not belong to
               the collectee, it shall be deemed that the collectee has not furnished
               his PAN to the collector. Accordingly, tax would be collectible at the
               rate specified in (i) above.

       (v) The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who
               does not have a permanent establishment in India.

(4) CBDT Clarification relating to certain issues with respect to
       section 206C(1F)

       These amendments in section 206C have given rise to certain issues relating
       to the scope and applicability of the provisions. Accordingly, the CBDT has,
       vide Circular No. 22/2016 dated 8.6.2016, clarified the following issues in
       "Question & Answer (Q&A)" format.

       Q.1 Whether TCS@1% is on sale of motor vehicle at retail level or also on
               sale of motor vehicles by manufacturers to dealers/ distributors?

       A. To bring high value transactions within the tax net, section 206C has
               been amended to provide that the seller shall collect the tax @ 1%
               from the purchaser on sale of motor vehicle of the value exceeding
               ` 10 lakhs. This is brought to cover all transactions of retail sales and
               accordingly, it will not apply on sale of motor vehicles by
               manufacturers to dealers/distributors.

       Q.2 Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable only to
               luxury cars?

       A. No, as per section 206C(1F), the seller shall collect tax@1% from the
               purchaser on sale of any motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs.

       Q.3 Whether TCS@1% is applicable in the case of sale to Government
               Departments, Embassies, Consulates and United Nation
               Institutions, of motor vehicle or any other goods or provision of
               services?

       A. Government, institutions notified under United Nations (Privileges and
               Immunities) Act 1947, and Embassies, Consulates, High Commission,
               Legation, Commission and trade representation of a foreign State shall
               not be liable to levy of TCS@1% under section 206C(1F).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.93  a

Q.4 Whether TCS is applicable on each sale of motor vehicle or on
       aggregate value of sale during the year?

A. Tax is to be collected at source@1% on sale consideration of a motor
       vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs. It is applicable to each sale and not to
       aggregate value of sale made during the year.

Q.5 Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable in case of
       an individual?

A. The definition of "Seller" as given in clause (c) of the Explanation
       below sub-section (11) of section 206C shall be applicable in the case
       of sale of motor vehicles also.

Q.6 How would the provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle be
       applicable in a case where part of the payment is made in cash
       and part is made by cheque?

A. The provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs is
       not dependent on mode of payment. Any sale of motor vehicle
       exceeding ` 10 lakhs would attract TCS@1%.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India                            Overview - TCS u/s 206C(1)/(1F) v. TDS u/s 194Q

                                                                Particulars                 206C(1)                      206C(1F)                            194Q           a
                                                   1. Point of time                            TCS                           TCS                              TDS
                                                                                                                                            At the time of payment or       7.94
                                                                             At the time of debit or at the  At the time of receipt
                                                                             time of receipt, whichever is                                  credit, whichever is earlier

                                                                             earlier

                                                   2. % of TDS/TCS, as Different rates for different 1% of sale consideration               0.1% of the value of purchases
                                                          the case may be goods (See below)                                                 exceeding ` 50 lakhs from a
                                                                                                                                            seller

                                                   3. Seller                 Central Govt., State Govt., Local Authority, Company, Co-op Buyer's turnover should exceed     INCOME TAX LAW
                                                          [206C(1)/(1F)]     society, firm, corporation, Individual/HUF whose turnover in ` 10 crore in the F.Y.2024-25
                                                          Buyer (194Q)       F.Y.2024-25 > ` 1 crore (business)/ ` 50 lakh (profession)

                                                   4. Exclusions from

                                                   the definition of

                                                   buyer

                                                   Common                    Central Govt, State Govt, embassy, High commission, legation,

                                                   Exclusions from consulate, commission, trade rep. of a foreign state

                                                   206C(1)/(1F)

                                                   Specific exclusions Public sector Co., a club and Local authority, public

                                                                             buyer in retail sale of goods sector co. engaged in the

                                                                             purchased for personal business of carrying

                                                                             consumption                     passengers
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India              Goods                      206C(1)                    206C(1F)       194Q
                                                                                                                        TCS         TDS
                                                                                          TCS                             -
                                                                                                                                       -
                                                   1 Alcoholic liquor for human           1%                              -
                                                                                                                          -            -
                                                   consumption                                                                         -

                                                   2 Tendu leaves                         5%

                                                   3 Timber or any other forest           2%

                                                   produce (not being tendu leaves)                                                                            ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                   obtained under forest lease

                                                   4 Timber obtained by any other         2%                                 -                     -
                                                                                                                             -
                                                   mode                                                                      -                     -
                                                                                                                           N.A.                    -
                                                   5 Scrap                                1%
                                                                                                                       1% of sale   Yes, if turnover of buyer
                                                   6 Minerals, being coal or lignite or   1%                         consideration  exceeds ` 10 crore in the
                                                                                                                                    F.Y.2024-25 and value of
                                                   iron ore                                                                         purchases from seller in
                                                                                                                                    F.Y.2025-26 exceeds ` 50
                                                   If items (1) to (6) are used for       Nil, by virtue of section
                                                   manufacturing, processing or                    206C(1A)                                      lakhs
                                                   producing articles or things or                                                                 -
                                                   generation of electricity and not for                                                                       a
                                                   trading purposes

                                                   7 Notified goods such as wrist watch,  -                                                                    7.95

                                                   home theatre system etc. exceeding

                                                   ` 10 lakhs                                                                                                  a
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India                Goods                   206C(1)    206C(1F)            194Q
                                                                                           TCS          TCS             TDS
                                                                                             -                                               a
                                                                                                    1% of sale             -
                                                   8 Sale of Motor Vehicle of value          -    consideration
                                                          exceeding ` 10 lakhs                     -                                         7.96

                                                   9 Sale of Motor Vehicle of value                       -      Yes, if turnover of dealer

                                                   exceeding ` 10 lakhs by                                       exceeds ` 10 crore in the

                                                   manufacturer         to  dealers/                             F.Y.2024-25 and value of

                                                   distributers                                                  motor           vehicles

                                                                                                                 purchased            from   INCOME TAX LAW

                                                                                                                 manufacturer in the

                                                                                                                 F.Y.2025-26     exceeds

                                                                                                                 ` 50 lakhs.

                                                   10 Sale of Motor Vehicle/ notified    -                                    -

                                                   goods of value not exceeding ` 10

                                                   lakhs and aggregate value of all

                                                   motor vehicles sold by the seller to

                                                   the buyer  ` 50 lakhs in the

                                                   F.Y.2025-26

                                                   11 Sale of Motor Vehicle/ notified    -        -              Yes, if turnover of buyer

                                                   goods of value not exceeding ` 10                             exceeds ` 10 crore in the

                                                   lakhs but aggregate value of all                                     F.Y.2024-25.

                                                   motor vehicles sold by the seller to

                                                   the buyer > ` 50 lakhs in the

                                                   F.Y.2025-26
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India                         Goods                  206C(1)  206C(1F)  194Q
                                                                                                   TCS       TCS    TDS
                                                   12 Sale of goods other than
                                                          mentioned in 1 to 11                       -    -         -
                                                          If aggregate value of goods sold by        -
                                                          seller to buyer is ` 50 lakhs or less           -         Yes, if turnover of buyer  ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS
                                                          If aggregate value of goods sold by
                                                          the seller to buyer is more than ` 50                     exceeds ` 10 crore in the
                                                          lakhs
                                                                                                                    F.Y.2024-25.

                                                                                                                                               a

                                                                                                                                               7.97

                                                                                                                                               a
a  7.98                  INCOME TAX LAW

(7) Furnishing of copy of declaration within specified time
       [Section 206C(1B)]

The person responsible for collecting tax under this section shall deliver or
cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner one copy of the
declaration referred to in sub-section (1A) on or before 7th of the month
next following the month in which the declaration is furnished to him.

(8) TCS to be paid within prescribed time [Section 206C(3)]

Any amount collected under this section shall be paid within the prescribed
time to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs.

Time limit for paying tax collected to the credit of the Central
Government [Rule 37CA]

         Person                                    Circumstance      Period within which
   collecting sums                                                   such sum should be
    in accordance                                                    paid to the credit of

     with section                                                          the Central
           206C                                                           Government

(1) An office of the (i)                           where the tax is  on the same day
      Government
                                                   paid     without

                                                   production of an

                                                   income-tax

                                                   challan

                         (ii) where tax is paid on or before 7 days

                                                   accompanied by from the end of the

                                                   an income-tax month in which the

                                                   challan           collection is made

(2) Collectors other                                                 within one week from
      than an office of                                              the last day of the
      the Government                                                 month in which the
                                                                     collection is made

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                 a                       7.99  a

(9) Main differences between TDS and TCS

          TDS                                      TCS

(1) TDS is tax deduction at TCS is tax collection at source.
      source

(2) Person responsible for (i) Seller of certain goods is responsible

paying is required to                              for collecting tax at source at the

deduct tax at source at                            prescribed rate from the buyer.

the prescribed rate.                               (ii) Person who grants licence or lease

                                                   (in respect of any parking lot, toll

                                                   plaza, mine or quarry) is responsible

                                                   for collecting tax at source at the

                                                   prescribed rate from the licensee or

                                                   lessee, as the case may be.

                                                   (iii)Authorised dealer receiving amount
                                                       for remittance under the LRS of the
                                                       RBI or seller of an overseas tour
                                                       program package is responsible for
                                                       collecting tax at source at the
                                                       prescribed rate from the buyer.

(3) Generally, tax is Generally, tax is required to be collected

required to be at source at the time of debiting of the

deducted at the time amount payable by the buyer of certain

of credit to the goods to the account of the buyer or at

account of the payee the time of receipt of such amount from

or at the time of the said buyer, whichever is earlier.

payment, whichever is However, in case of sale of motor

earlier.                                           vehicle/ notified goods of the value

However, in case of exceeding ` 10 lakhs, tax collection at

payment of salary, source u/s 206C(1F) is required at the

payment in respect of time of receipt of sale consideration.

life insurance policy

etc. tax is required to

be deducted at the

time of payment.

Note ­ TCS will be dealt with in detail at the Final level.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.100  INCOME TAX LAW

(10) Common number for TDS and TCS [Section 203A]

       (i) Persons responsible for deducting tax or collecting tax at source
               should apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a "tax-
               deduction and collection-account number".

       (ii) Section 203A(2) enlists the documents/certificates/returns/challans in
               which the "tax deduction account number" or "tax collection account
               number" or "tax deduction and collection account number" has to be
               compulsorily quoted.

       (iii) The requirement of obtaining and quoting of TAN under section 203A
               shall not apply to such person, as may be notified by the Central
               Government in this behalf.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India                  LET US RECAPITULATE

                                                   I.    Tax deduction at source

                                                   Section Nature of       Threshold Limit      Payer                 Payee    Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source

                                                       192 Salary          Basic exemption Any            person Individual    Average rate At the time of payment    ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS
                                                                                                                               of income-tax
                                                                           limit             responsible  for (Employee)

                                                                           This is taken care paying any income
                                                                           of in computation chargeable under the
                                                                           of the average head "Salaries

                                                                           rate of income-

                                                                           tax.

                                                   192A  Premature         Payment  or Trustees of the EPF Individual          10%         on At the time of payment
                                                                                       Scheme or any (Employee)
                                                         withdrawal from aggregate                                             premature
                                                                                     authorised person
                                                         Employees' payment            under the Scheme                        taxable

                                                         Provident Fund ` 50,000                                               withdrawal

                                                       193 Interest on Amount       or Any                person Any resident       10%    At the time of credit of

                                                         Securities        aggregate amount responsible   for                              such income to the         a

                                                                           > ` 10,000 in a F.Y. paying any income by                       account of the payee

                                                                                             way of interest on                            or at the time of          7.101

                                                                                             securities                                    payment, whichever is

                                                                                                                                           earlier.

                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                         a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit       Payer                  Payee  Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source                                                                    a

                                                   194 Dividend            Amount    or The Principal Officer Resident         10%  Before making any

                                                         (including        aggregate amount of a domestic shareholder               payment by any mode       7.1 02

                                                         dividends on > ` 10,000 in a F.Y., company                                 in respect of any

                                                         preference        in case of dividend                                      dividend or before
                                                         shares)           paid or credited to
                                                                                                                                    making        any

                                                                           an        individual                                     distribution          or

                                                                           shareholder by any                                       payment of dividend.

                                                                           mode other than                                                                    INCOME TAX LAW
                                                                           cash

                                                                           > No threshold in
                                                                           other cases

                                                   194A  Interest other Amount       or Any person (other Any Resident         10%  At the time of credit of

                                                         than interest aggregate                 than an individual or              such income to the

                                                         on securities amount        > HUF whose total                              account of the payee

                                                                           ` 50,000 in a F.Y., sales, gross receipts                or at the time of

                                                                           in case of interest or turnover from                     payment, whichever is

                                                                           credited or paid business        or                      earlier.

                                                                           by ­                  profession do not

                                                                           (i) a banking exceed ` 1 crore in

                                                                           company;              case of business or

                                                                           (ii) a co-operative ` 50 lakhs in case of

                                                                           society engaged profession during the

                                                                           in        banking immediately

                                                                                                 preceding  F.Y.)
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit       Payer                 Payee     Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source

                                                                           business; and         responsible  for

                                                                           (iii) a post office paying interest other
                                                                           on any deposit than interest on

                                                                           under a notified securities.

                                                                           Scheme.

                                                                           In all the above                                                                     ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                                           cases, if payee is a

                                                                           resident senior

                                                                           citizen,       tax

                                                                           deduction limit is

                                                                           > ` 1,00,000.

                                                                           > ` 10,000 in a
                                                                           F.Y., in other
                                                                           cases.

                                                   194B  Winnings from Amount in respect The                  person Any Person  30%  At the time of payment

                                                         any lottery, of                single responsible    for

                                                         crossword         transaction    > paying income by

                                                         puzzle or card ` 10,000.                way of such winnings                                           a

                                                         game or other

                                                         game of any                                                                                            7.103

                                                         sort or from

                                                         gambling or

                                                         betting of any

                                                         form or nature                                                                                         a
                                                   a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of Threshold Limit        Payer                     Payee  Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment for deduction of

                                                                  tax at source                                                                                 a

                                                   194BA Winnings from On the net Any                  person Any person     30%  At the end of the F.Y.

                                                   online games winnings in a responsible                        for              In case there is              7.1 04

                                                      person's     user paying income by                                          withdrawal from user

                                                      account                    as way of such winnings                          account during the F.Y.,

                                                      computed                   in from any online                               tax would be deducted
                                                      prescribed                    game.
                                                                                                                                  at the time of such

                                                      manner.                                                                     withdrawal on net

                                                                                                                                  winnings comprised in         INCOME TAX LAW

                                                                                                                                  such withdrawal. In

                                                                                                                                  addition, tax would

                                                                                                                                  also be deducted on

                                                                                                                                  the remaining amount

                                                                                                                                  of net winnings in the

                                                                                                                                  user account as

                                                                                                                                  computed                  in

                                                                                                                                  prescribed manner at

                                                                                                                                  the end of the F.Y.

                                                   194BB Winnings from Amount in respect Book Maker or a Any Person          30%  At the time of payment

                                                   horse race of   single person                       holding

                                                      transaction                > licence for horse

                                                      ` 10,000.                             racing or for

                                                                                            arranging            for

                                                                                            wagering or betting

                                                                                            in any race course.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of Threshold Limit     Payer                     Payee  Rate of TDS Time of deduction

                                                   payment for deduction of

                                                   tax at source

                                                   194C Payments to Single  sum Central/State Govt., Any Resident 1% of sum At the time of credit of

                                                   Contractors credited or paid > Local               authority, contractor for paid  or such sum to the

                                                   ` 30,000                           Central/State/            carrying out credited, if the account of the

                                                   (or)                               Provincial      Corpn., any       work payee is an contractor or at the

                                                   The aggregate of company, firm, trust, (including Individual or time of payment,

                                                   sums credited or registered society, co- supply                        of HUF            whichever is earlier.  ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                   paid to a operative                                society, labour)    2% of sum

                                                   contractor during university established                               paid        or

                                                   the F.Y. > under Central/State/                                        credited, if the

                                                   ` 1,00,000                         Provincial Act, declared            payee is any

                                                   Individual/HUF university under the                                    other person.

                                                   need not deduct UGC Act, Govt. of

                                                   tax where sum is Foreign State or a

                                                   credited or paid foreign                       enterprise,

                                                   exclusively for individual/ HUF whose

                                                   personal purposes total sales, gross

                                                                                      receipts or turnover

                                                                                      from business or

                                                                                      profession exceeds                                                           a

                                                                                      ` 1 crore in case of

                                                                                      business or ` 50 lakhs                                                       7.105

                                                                                      in case of profession

                                                                                      during the immediately

                                                                                      preceding F.Y.                                                               a
                                                   a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit            Payer          Payee          Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source                                                                                a

                                                   194D Insurance          Amount     or Any                 person Any Resident    2%, if the At the time of credit of
                                                             Commission
                                                                           aggregate         responsible     for                    payee is a such income to the         7.1 06

                                                                           amount     > paying any income by                        non-corporate account of the payee

                                                                           ` 20,000 in a F.Y. way of remuneration                   resident    or at the time of

                                                                                             or reward for                          10%, if the payment, whichever is
                                                                                                                                    payee is a earlier.
                                                                                             soliciting      or

                                                                                             procuring insurance                    domestic

                                                                                             business                               company                               INCOME TAX LAW

                                                   194DA Any sum under Amount         or Any                 person Any resident    2% of the   At the time of payment
                                                                                                                                    amount of
                                                   a Life Insurance aggregate amount responsible             for
                                                                                                                                      income
                                                   Policy      not  ` 1,00,000 in a paying any sum                                  comprised

                                                   fulfilling the financial year             under a LIP, including                   therein.

                                                   conditions                                the sum allocated by

                                                   specified u/s                             way of bonus

                                                   10(10D)

                                                   194G Commission > ` 20,000 in a Any                       person Any person      2%          At the time of credit of

                                                   on sale of financial year                 responsible     for stocking,                      such income to the

                                                   lottery tickets                           paying any income by distributing,                 account of the payee

                                                                                             way of commission, purchasing or                   or at the time of

                                                                                             remuneration or prize selling lottery              payment, whichever is

                                                                                             (by whatever name tickets                          earlier.

                                                                                             called) on lottery

                                                                                             tickets
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit   Payer                   Payee  Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source

                                                   194H  Commission or > ` 20,000 in a Any person (other Any resident           2%          At the time of credit of

                                                         brokerage         financial year    than an Individual or                          such income to the

                                                                                             HUF whose total                                account of the payee

                                                                                             sales, gross receipts                          or at the time of

                                                                                             or turnover from                               payment, whichever is

                                                                                             business       or                              earlier.                  ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                                                             profession do not

                                                                                             exceed ` 1 crore in

                                                                                             case of business or

                                                                                             ` 50 lakhs in case of

                                                                                             profession during the

                                                                                             immediately

                                                                                             preceding      F.Y.)

                                                                                             responsible    for

                                                                                             paying commission

                                                                                             or brokerage.

                                                   194-I Rent              > ` 50,000 per Any person (other Any resident    For P & M or At the time of credit of

                                                                           month or part of a than an individual or         equipment- such income to the             a

                                                                           month             HUF whose total                2%              account of the payee

                                                                                             sales, gross receipts                          or at the time of

                                                                                             or turnover from               For land or payment, whichever is         7.107
                                                                                                                            building, land earlier.
                                                                                             business       or

                                                                                             profession carried on          appurtenant

                                                                                             by him do not exceed           to a building,                            a
                                                   a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit        Payer                 Payee      Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source                                                                                  a

                                                                                             ` 1 crore in case of                  furniture or
                                                                                                                                   fittings -10%
                                                                                             business            or                                                         7.1 08

                                                                                             ` 50 lakhs in case of

                                                                                             profession during the

                                                                                             immediately

                                                                                             preceding           F.Y.)

                                                                                             responsible         for

                                                                                             paying rent.                                                                   INCOME TAX LAW

                                                   194-IA Payment on  ` 50 lakh Any person, being a Resident                       1%      of At the time of credit of

                                                   transfer of (Consideration transferee (other than transferor                    consideration such sum to the

                                                   certain                 for transfer or a person referred to                    for transfer or account of the

                                                   immovable stamp         duty in section 194LA                                   stamp duty transferor or at the

                                                   property other value)                     responsible         for               value,         time of payment,

                                                   than                                      paying compensation                   whichever is whichever is earlier.

                                                   agricultural                              for        compulsory                 higher

                                                   land                                      acquisition         of

                                                                                             immovable property

                                                                                             other than rural

                                                                                             agricultural land)

                                                   194-IB Payment of > ` 50,000 for a Individual/                HUF Any Resident      2%         At the time of credit of

                                                   rent by certain month or part of a (other                     than                             rent, for the last month

                                                   individuals or month                      Individual/HUF whose                                 of the previous year or

                                                   HUF                                       total sales, gross                                   the last month of

                                                                                             receipts or turnover                                 tenancy, if the property
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit        Payer             Payee  Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source

                                                                                             from business or                               is vacated during the
                                                                                                                                            year, as the case may
                                                                                             profession carried on                          be, to the account of
                                                                                                                                            the payee or at the
                                                                                             by him exceeds ` 1                             time of payment,
                                                                                                                                            whichever is earlier
                                                                                             crore in case of

                                                                                             business      or

                                                                                             ` 50 lakhs in case of                                                 ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                                                             profession during the

                                                                                             immediately

                                                                                             preceding     F.Y.)

                                                                                             responsible   for

                                                                                             paying rent.

                                                   194J  Fees        for > ` 50,000 in a Any person, other Any Resident    2% - Payee At the time of credit of

                                                         professional or financial year, for than an individual or         engaged only such sum to the

                                                         technical         each category of HUF;                           in  the account of the payee

                                                         services/         income. (However, However, in case of           business of or at the time of

                                                         Royalty/ Non- this limit does not fees for professional           operation of payment, whichever is

                                                         compete fees/ apply in case of or technical services              call centre earlier.

                                                         Director's        payment made to paid or credited,               2% - In case
                                                                                                                           of fees for
                                                         remuneration director of a individual/HUF,                        technical                               a

                                                                           company).         whose total sales,

                                                                                             gross receipts or             services or                             7.109
                                                                                                                           royalty, where
                                                                                             turnover      from

                                                                                             business      or              such royalty is
                                                                                                                           in the nature
                                                                                             profession exceeds                                                    a
                                                         a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit           Payer            Payee       Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of
                                                                                                                                 of consider-
                                                                           tax at source                                         ation for sale,                 a
                                                                                                                                 distribution or
                                                                                             ` 1 crore in case of                exhibition of
                                                                                                                                 cinemato-
                                                                                             business or ` 50 lakhs              graphic films                   7.1 10
                                                                                                                                 10% - Other
                                                                                             in case of profession               payments

                                                                                             during             the

                                                                                             immediately
                                                                                             preceding F.Y., is

                                                                                             liable to deduct tax                                                INCOME TAX LAW
                                                                                             u/s 194J, except

                                                                                             where fees for
                                                                                             professional services

                                                                                             is credited or paid
                                                                                             exclusively for his

                                                                                             personal purposes.

                                                   194K  Income on Amount                 or Any            person Any resident  10%  At the time of credit of

                                                         units other aggregate               responsible         for                  such sum to the

                                                         than in the amount > ` 10,000 paying any income in                           account of the payee

                                                         nature            of in a F.Y.      respect of units of a                    or at the time of

                                                         capital gains                       mutual                                   payment, whichever is

                                                                                             fund/Administrator of                    earlier.

                                                                                             the           specified

                                                                                             undertaking/

                                                                                             specified company
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit    Payer                    Payee    Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source

                                                   194LA Compensation Amount          or Any               person Any Resident       10%       At the time of payment

                                                         on acquisition aggregate            responsible          for

                                                         of        certain amount     > paying any sum in

                                                         immovable ` 5,00,000 in a F.Y. the nature of

                                                         property other                      compensation         or

                                                         than                                enhanced                                                                    ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                         agricultural                        compensation on

                                                         land situated                       compulsory

                                                         in India                            acquisition          of

                                                                                             immovable property

                                                   194M  - Payments to > ` 50,00,000 in a Individual or HUF Any Resident             2%        At the time of credit of

                                                         Contractors financial year          other than those who                              such sum or at the

                                                         - Commission                        are required to                                   time of payment,
                                                         or brokerage                        deduct tax at source
                                                                                             under section 194C                                whichever is earlier.
                                                         - Fees for                          or 194H or 194J
                                                         professional

                                                         services                                                                                                        a

                                                   194N Cash               > ` 3 crore if the - a banking company Any person    @2% of such At the time of payment
                                                             withdrawals   recipient is a co- or any bank or
                                                                                                                                sum            of such sum               7.111

                                                                           operative society banking institution                In case the

                                                                           > ` 1 crore in case - a co-operative                 recipient has
                                                                                                                                not filed ROI
                                                                           of others         society engaged in                                                          a
                                                   a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit   Payer                   Payee  Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                           tax at source                                                                   a

                                                                                             carrying on the                for all the 3                  7.1 12
                                                                                             business of banking            immediately
                                                                                             or                             preceding
                                                                                                                            P.Y.s, for which
                                                                                             - a post office

                                                                                             who is responsible for         time limit u/s
                                                                                             paying any sum,                139(1) has

                                                                                             being the amount or            expired, such                  INCOME TAX LAW
                                                                                             the aggregate of               sum shall be

                                                                                             amounts, as the case           the amt or
                                                                                             may be, in cash                agg. of amts,
                                                                                             exceeding ` 1 crore/
                                                                                             ` 3 crore in case the          in cash > ` 20
                                                                                             recipient is a                 lakh during the
                                                                                             cooperative society,
                                                                                             during the previous            P.Y., TDS

                                                                                                                            - @2% of the
                                                                                                                            sum, where

                                                                                             year, to any person            cash
                                                                                             from one or more
                                                                                             accounts maintained            withdrawal >
                                                                                             by the recipient
                                                                                                                            ` 20 lakhs but

                                                                                                                             ` 1 crore/

                                                                                                                            ` 3 crore in

                                                                                                                            case       the

                                                                                                                            recipient is a

                                                                                                                            co-operative

                                                                                                                            society
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit            Payer         Payee  Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source

                                                                                                                           - @5% of the                   ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS
                                                                                                                           sum, where
                                                                                                                           cash withdrawal
                                                                                                                           > ` 1 crore/
                                                                                                                           ` 3 crore in case
                                                                                                                           the recipient is
                                                                                                                           a co-operative
                                                                                                                           society

                                                   194P  Pension (along Basic exemption Notified      specified Specified  Rates in force,

                                                         with interest limit                    bank         senior citizen where the

                                                         on        bank [` 4,00,000 (in                      i.e.,         An individual has

                                                         account)          case specified                    individual, exercised the

                                                                           senior citizen pays               being         a option    of

                                                                           tax under default                 resident in shifting out of

                                                                           tax regime u/s                    India, who the default tax

                                                                           115BAC),                          - is of the regime.

                                                                           ` 3,00,000 /                      age of 75

                                                                           ` 5,00,000, as the                years or more Rates                          a
                                                                                                             at any time specified in
                                                                           case may be, if                   during the PY; section

                                                                           specified senior

                                                                           citizen    has                    - is having 115BAC,                          7.113

                                                                           exercised  the                    pension       where the

                                                                           option of shifting                income and individual

                                                                           out of the default                no            other pays  tax                a
                                                            a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section     Nature of  Threshold Limit        Payer       Payee       Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                               payment    for deduction of

                                                                          tax at source                                                                 a

                                                                          tax         regime            income except under the

                                                                          providing         u/s         interest         default tax                    7.1 14

                                                                          115BAC] [i.e., total          income           regime.

                                                                          income      after             received or

                                                                          giving effect to              receivable
                                                                          the deduction
                                                                                                        from        any

                                                                          allowable under               account                                         INCOME TAX LAW
                                                                          Chapter VI-A, if              maintained by

                                                                          any allowable                 such
                                                                          should exceed the             individual in

                                                                          basic exemption               the       same
                                                                          limit. Further, in
                                                                                                        specified bank

                                                                          case              the         in which he is
                                                                                                        receiving his
                                                                          individual        is

                                                                          entitled to rebate            pension
                                                                          u/s 87A from tax              income; and

                                                                          payable, then the             - has
                                                                          same should be                furnished a
                                                                                                        declaration to
                                                                          given effect to]              the specified
                                                                                                        bank.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of       Threshold Limit   Payer                   Payee   Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment  for deduction of

                                                                             tax at source

                                                   194Q Purchase           of > ` 50 lakhs in a Buyer, who is Any resident   0.1% of sum  At the time of credit of
                                                             goods                                                            exceeding   such sum to the
                                                                           previous year     responsible  for                 ` 50 lakhs  account of the seller or
                                                                                                                                          at the time of payment,
                                                                                             paying any sum to                            whichever is earlier.

                                                                                             any resident for
                                                                                             purchase of goods.

                                                                                             Buyer means a person                                                   ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS

                                                                                             whose total sales,
                                                                                             gross receipts or

                                                                                             turnover from business
                                                                                             exceeds ` 10 crores
                                                                                             during the FY
                                                                                             immediately preceding
                                                                                             the FY in which the
                                                                                             purchase of goods is
                                                                                             carried out.

                                                   194R  Any benefit or Value             or Any person (other Any resident  10% of value Before providing such
                                                                                                                             or aggre. of benefit or perquisite
                                                         perquisite, aggregate            of than an individual or           value of such
                                                                                                                             benefit or
                                                         whether           value of benefit or HUF whose total               perquisite                             a

                                                         convertible perquisite           > sales, gross receipts

                                                         into money or ` 20,000 in a or turnover do not                                                             7.115

                                                         not, arising financial year         exceed ` 1 crore in

                                                         from business                       case of business or

                                                         or the exercise                     ` 50 lakhs in case of

                                                         of a profession                     profession during the                                                  a
                                                         a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  Section Nature of Threshold Limit              Payer            Payee      Rate of TDS Time of deduction
                                                                  payment for deduction of

                                                                          tax at source                                                                       a

                                                         The provisions                     immediately
                                                         would apply to
                                                         any benefit or                     preceding    F.Y.)                                                7.1 16
                                                         perquisite,
                                                                                            responsible  for

                                                                                            providing to a

                                                         whether in                         resident, any benefit
                                                         cash or in kind                    or perquisite.

                                                         or partly in                       In case of a company,
                                                                                            "person responsible
                                                         cash       and                     for paying" means                                                 INCOME TAX LAW

                                                         partly in kind.

                                                                                            the company itself

                                                                                            including    the

                                                                                            Principal    Officer
                                                                                            thereof.

                                                   194T  Any sum in Sum                  or Any person, being a Partner       of 10%  At the time of credit
                                                                                                                                      of such sum to the
                                                         the nature of aggregate         of firm                   such firm          account of the partner
                                                                                                                                      (including the capital
                                                         salary,          such sum >                                                  account) or at the
                                                                                                                                      time of payment,
                                                         remuneration, ` 20,000 during                                                whichever is earlier.

                                                         commission, the F.Y.

                                                         bonus      or

                                                         intertest
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a  7.117  a

Notes ­
(1) Section 206AA requires furnishing of PAN by the deductee to the deductor,

       failing which the deductor has to deduct tax at the higher of the following
       rates, namely, -

       (i) at the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Income-tax Act,
               1961; or

       (ii) at the rate or rates in force; or

       (iii) at the rate of 20% and in case of section 194-Q, 5%

       Meaning of "specified person" ­ A person who has not furnished the
       return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous year
       immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be
       deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under
       section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and
       tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the said previous
       year.

       However, the specified person would not include -

       - a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India;
               or

       - a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the
               assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by
               the Central Government in this behalf (RBI has been notified by the
               Central Government for this purpose).

(3) The threshold limit given in column (3) of the table is with respect to each
       payee.

 II Advance Payment of Tax
 Liability for payment of advance tax [Sections 207 & 208]
 Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year in respect of the total
 income (TI) of the assessee which would be chargeable to tax for the A.Y.
 immediately following that financial year.
 Advance tax is payable during a F.Y. in every case where the amount of such tax
 payable by the assessee during the year is ` 10,000 or more.
 However, an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any
 time during the previous year, who does not have any income chargeable under
 the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" (PGBP), is not liable to pay
 advance tax.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.118                 INCOME TAX LAW

Instalments of advance tax and due dates [Section 211]

Advance tax payment schedule for corporates and non-corporates (other
than an assessee computing profits on presumptive basis under section
44AD or section 44ADA) ­ Four instalments

Due date of instalment   Amount payable
On or before 15th June   Not less than 15% of advance tax liability.

On or before 15th September Not less than 45% of advance tax liability (-)
                                          amount paid in earlier instalment.

On or before 15th December Not less than 75% of advance tax liability (-)
                                          amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments.

On or before 15th March  The whole amount of advance tax liability (-)
                         amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments.

Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive basis
under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)
An eligible assessee, computing profits or gains of business or profession on
presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section 44AD(1) or in
respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall be required to
pay advance tax of the whole amount on or before 15th March of the F.Y.

However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March shall
also be treated as advance tax paid during the F.Y. ending on that day.

Interest for defaults in payment of advance tax [Section 234B]

(1) Interest u/s 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or payment
       of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax.

(2) The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from
       1st April following the F.Y. upto the date of determination of total income
       under section 143(1) and where regular assessment is made, upto the
       date of such regular assessment.

(3) Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the
       assessed tax and the advance tax paid.

(4) "Assessed tax" means the tax on total income determined u/s 143(1) less
       TDS & TCS, any relief of tax allowed u/s 89, any tax credit allowed to be
       set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the
       assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
       provided under section 115BAC(1A).

       Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) shall not include
       the additional income-tax, if any, payable u/s 140B.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS              a 7.119                      a

(5) Where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee u/s 140A or otherwise,
       interest shall be calculated upto the date of payment of such tax and
       reduced by the interest, if any, paid u/s 140A towards the interest
       chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall be calculated at
       1% on the amount by which the tax so paid together with the advance tax
       paid falls short of the assessed tax.

Interest for deferment of advance tax [Section 234C]

(1) Manner of computation of interest u/s 234C for deferment of
       advance tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees:
       In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and gains
       in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1),
       who is liable to pay advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the
       advance tax paid by such assessee on its current income on or before the
       dates specified in column (1) below is less than the specified percentage
       [given in column (2) below] of tax due on returned income, then simple
       interest@1% per month for the period specified in column (4) on the
       amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable u/s 234C.

Specified date  Specified                              Shortfall in advance tax     Period
        (1)          %                                                                 (4)
                    (2)                                               (3)
15th June                                          15% of tax due on returned      3 months
                   15%                             income (-) advance tax paid up
15th September                                     to 15th June                    3 months
                   45%                             45% of tax due on returned
15th December                                      income (-) advance tax paid up  3 months
                   75%                             to 15th September
15th March                                         75% of tax due on returned      1 month
                  100%                             income (-) advance tax paid up
                                                   to 15th December
                                                   100% of tax due on returned
                                                   income (-) advance tax paid up
                                                   to 15th March

Note ­ However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current income,
on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or 36% of the
tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the assessee shall not be
liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on those dates.

Tax due on returned income = Tax chargeable on total income declared
in the return of income ­ TDS ­ TCS - any relief of tax allowed u/s 89 - any

tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.120              INCOME TAX LAW

   section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of
   the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

(2) Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee
       who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of
       section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1):
       In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the
       provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), who is liable to pay
       advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by
       the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is less than
       the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be liable to
       pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall from
       the tax due on the returned income.

(3) Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases:
       Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall
       in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on
       account of under-estimate or failure to estimate ­

       (i) the amount of capital gains;

       (ii) income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from
              lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;

       (iii) income under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession"
              in cases where the income accrues or arises under the said head for
              the first time.

       (iv) the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred
              u/s 2(22)(e).

       However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax
       payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv), as the
       case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of
       the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such
       instalments are due, by 31st March of the financial year.

Tax Collection at source [Section 206C]

(1) Sale of certain goods [Section 206C(1)] - Sellers of certain goods are
        required to collect tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified
        percentage for collection of tax at source is as follows:

   Nature of Goods                                 Percentage

   (i) Alcoholic liquor for human consumption      1%

   (ii) Tendu leaves                               5%

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                a 7.121  a

(iii) Timber or any other forest produce (not being         2%

tendu leaves) obtained under a forest lease

(iv) Timber obtained by any mode other than (iii)           2%

(v) Scrap                                                   1%

(vi) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore            1%

The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount payable
by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from
the buyer, whichever is earlier.

However, no collection of tax shall be made in the case of a resident
buyer, if such buyer furnishes a declaration in writing in duplicate to the
effect that goods are to be utilised for the purpose of manufacturing,
processing or producing articles or things or for the purposes of
generation of power and not for trading purposes [Section 206C(1A)].

(2) Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry
        [Section 206C(1C)] - Every person who grants a lease or a licence or
        enters into a contract or otherwise transfers any right or interest in any

        - parking lot or

        - toll plaza or

        - a mine or a quarry

        to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of
        such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of
        business. The tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or
        lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at the
        rate of 2%, at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the licensee
        or lessee to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from the
        licensee or lessee, whichever is earlier

(3) Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs [Section
       206C(1F)] - Every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as
       consideration for sale of a motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10
       lakhs, shall, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the
       buyer@1% of the sale consideration.

       The scope of section 206C(1F) has been expanded to include every
       person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale
       of any other notified goods exceeding ` 10 lakhs, to, at the time of receipt
       of such amount, collect tax from the buyer@1% of the sale consideration.
       Goods notified for collection of tax at source are wrist watch, art piece
       such as antiques, painting, sculpture, collectibles such as coin, stamp,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.122  INCOME TAX LAW

   yacht, rowing boat, canoe, helicopter, pair of sunglasses, bag such as
   handbag, purse, pair of shoes, sportswear and equipment such as golf
   kit, ski-wear, home theatre system and horse for horse racing in race
   clubs and horse for polo.

(4) Remittance under LRS of RBI or purchase of an overseas tour package
       [Section 206C(1G)] - Every person,

   - being an authorized dealer, who receives amount under the
          Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) of the RBI for remittance from

   a buyer, being a person remitting such amount,

   - being seller of an overseas tour programme package who receives
          any amount from the buyer who purchases the package

   has to collect tax at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the
   buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer by any
   mode, whichever is earlier.

   Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of an
   overseas tour programme package

    S. Amount and purpose of remittance            Rate of TCS
   No.

   (i) Where the amount is for purchase of 5% till ` 10 lakhs, 20%
           an overseas tour programme package thereafter

   (ii) (a) Where the amount or aggregate Nil
                 of the amounts being remitted (No tax to be collected
                 by a buyer is less than ` 10 lakhs at source)
                 in a financial year

   (iii) (a) where the amount is remitted for 5% of the amt or agg.

          the purpose of education or of amts in excess of

          medical treatment; and                   ` 10 lakhs

   (b) the amount or aggregate of the
        amounts in excess of ` 10 lakhs is

          remitted by the buyer in a
          financial year

   (iv) (a) where the amount is remitted for 20% of the amt or agg.

          the purpose other than of amts in excess of

          mentioned in (iii) above; and            ` 10 lakh

   (b) the amount or aggregate of the

          amounts in excess of ` 10 lakhs is

          remitted by the buyer in a

          financial year

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a 7.123  a

            (v) (a) where the amount being Nil
                         remitted out is a loan obtained
                         from any financial institution as
                         defined in section 80E, for the
                         purpose of pursuing any
                         education; and

                   (b) the amount or aggregate of the
                         amounts in excess of ` 10 lakhs
                         is remitted by the buyer in a
                         financial year

        Cases where no tax is to be collected
           (i) No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of
                  which the sum has been collected by the seller

           (ii) No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any
                  other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax

           (iii) No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State
                  Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a
                  commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign
                  State, a local authority or any other person notified by the Central
                  Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions stipulated
                  thereunder.
                  Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated
                  17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G) would
                  not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-resident in
                  terms of section 6 and does not have a permanent establishment
                  in India.

(5) In case of non-furnishing of PAN by the collectee to the collector, tax is
        required to be collected at the higher of ­
        (i) twice the rate specified in the relevant provisions of the Act; or
        (ii) at 5%
        However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 20%.
        The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who does
        not have a permanent establishment in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a      7.124        INCOME TAX LAW

              TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Ashwin doing manufacture and wholesale trade furnishes you the following
       information:

Total turnover for the financial year -

       Particulars                                 `

2024-25             1,05,00,000

2025-26             95,00,000

Examine whether tax deduction at source provisions are attracted for the
below said expenses incurred during the financial year 2025-26:

                    Particulars                               `

Interest paid to UCO Bank on 15.8.2025                41,000

Contract payment to Raj (2 contracts of ` 12,000 24,000
each) on 12.12.2025

Shop rent paid                                        ` 40,000 per month

Commission paid to Balu on 15.3.2026                  7,000

2. Compute the amount of tax deduction at source on the following payments
       made by M/s S Ltd. during the financial year 2025-26 as per the provisions of
       the Income-tax Act, 1961.

   S.    Date                             Nature of Payment

No.                 Payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. R, a transporter who
                    owns 8 goods carriages throughout the previous year
(i) 1-10-2025       and furnishes a declaration to this effect alongwith his
                    PAN.
(ii) 1-11-2025
(iii) 30-06-2025    Payment of fee for technical services of ` 25,000 and
                    Royalty of ` 20,000 to Mr. Shyam who is having PAN.

                    Payment of ` 25,000 to M/s X Ltd. for repair of
                    building.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a 7.125  a

         (iv) 01-01-2026 Payment of ` 2,00,000 made to Mr. A for purchase of
                                      diaries made according to specifications of
                                      M/s S Ltd. However, no material was supplied for such
                                      diaries to Mr. A by M/s S Ltd or its associates.

         (v) 01-01-2026 Payment of ` 2,30,000 made to Mr. Bharat for
                                      compulsory acquisition of his house as per law of the
                                      State Government.

         (vi) 01-02-2026 Payment of commission of ` 14,000 to Mr. Y.

3. Examine the applicability of TDS provisions and TDS amount in the following
       cases:

       (a) Rent of ` 55,000 per month was paid for hire of machinery by B Ltd. to
               Mr. Raman in FY 2025-26 .

       (b) Fee paid on 1.12.2025 to Dr. Srivatsan by Sundar (HUF) ` 55,000 for
               surgery performed on a member of the family.

       (c) ABC and Co. Ltd. paid ` 19,000 to one of its Directors as sitting fees on
               01-01-2026.

4. Examine the applicability of tax deduction at source provisions, the rate and
       amount of tax deduction in the following cases for the F.Y. 2025-26:

       (1) Payment made by a company to Mr. Ram, sub-contractor, ` 3,00,000 with
              outstanding balance of ` 1,20,000 shown in the books as on 31.3.2026.

       (2) Winning from horse race ` 1,50,000 paid to Mr. Shyam, an Indian
               resident.

       (3) ` 2,00,000 paid to Mr. A, a resident individual, on 22-02-2026 by the
               State of Uttar Pradesh on compulsory acquisition of his urban land.

5. Briefly discuss the provisions relating to payment of advance tax on
       income arising from capital gains and casual income.

6. Examine the applicability of Tax deduction at source (TDS) or Tax collection at
       source (TCS) as per the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the A.Y 2026-27 in the
       following situations

       (i) Mr. Raja paid ` 12 lakhs on 1.11.2025 to M/s. Thomas Cook for a
               holiday package to Singapore for a week with his family, comprising of
               his wife and two children, being twins aged 22 years, in the last week of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.126  INCOME TAX LAW

   November. Mr. Raja also remitted ` 13 lakhs on 28.3.2026, out of his
   personal savings, under LRS through Bank of India, as gift to his sister
   residing in London, on the occasion of her 50th birthday.

(ii) Mr. Rohit and Mr. Raj are the joint owners of a house property. They
       sold the house property on 31.12.2025 for ` 60 lakhs, receiving ` 30
       lakhs each as their respective shares. However, the stamp duty value
       (SDV) of the property on the date of transfer is ` 75 lakhs. The property
       was jointly purchased by Ms. Shashi and Ms. Sujata.

(iii) XYZ Ltd. provided a luxury car worth ` 15 lakh to its distributor, Mr. A,
       as an incentive for achieving high sales targets.

7. Mr. Sameer, aged 52 years, provides you the following information and
       requests you to determine his advance tax liability with due dates for the
       financial year 2025-26.

Estimated tax liability for the financial year 2025-26  ` 80,000
Tax deducted at source for this year                    ` 12,000

                                     ANSWERS

1. As the turnover of business carried on by Ashwin for F.Y. 2024-25, has
       exceeded ` 1 crore, he has to comply with the tax deduction provisions
       during the financial year 2025-26, subject to the exemptions provided for
       under the relevant sections for applicability of TDS provisions.

Interest paid to UCO Bank
TDS under section 194A is not attracted in respect of interest paid to a
banking company.

Contract payment of ` 24,000 to Raj for 2 contracts of ` 12,000 each

TDS provisions under section 194C would not be attracted if the amount
paid to a contractor does not exceed ` 30,000 in a single payment or
` 1,00,000 in the aggregate during the financial year. Therefore, TDS
provisions under section 194C are not attracted in this case.

Shop Rent paid ` 40,000 per month ­ Tax under section 194-I would not
be attracted since the rental payment does not exceed ` 50,000 per month

or part of the month.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a 7.127  a

       Commission paid to Balu ­ No, tax has to be deducted under section 194H
       in this case as the commission does not exceed ` 20,000.

2. (i) No tax is required to be deducted at source under section 194C by
               M/s S Ltd. on payment to transporter Mr. R, since he satisfies the
               following conditions:

               (1) He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the
                       previous year.

               (2) He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods
                       carriages;

               (3) He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN.

       (ii) As per section 194J, liability to deduct tax is attracted only in case the
               payment made as fees for technical services and royalty, individually,
               exceeds ` 50,000 during the financial year. In the given case, since the
               individual payments for fee of technical services i.e., ` 25,000 and
               royalty ` 20,000 is less than ` 50,000 each, there is no liability to
               deduct tax at source. It is assumed that no other payment towards
               fees for technical services and royalty were made during the year to
               Mr. Shyam.

       (iii) Provisions of section 194C are not attracted in this case, since the
               payment for repair of building on 30.06.2025 to M/s X Ltd. is less than
               the threshold limit of ` 30,000.

       (iv) According to section 194C, the definition of "work" does not include
               the manufacturing or supply of product according to the specification
               by customer in case the material is purchased from a person other
               than the customer or associate of such customer.

               Therefore, there is no liability to deduct tax at source in respect of
               payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. A, since the contract is a contract for
               `sale'.

       (v) As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a
               resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on
               account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable
               property, is responsible for deduction of tax at source if such payment

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.128  INCOME TAX LAW

               or the aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the
               financial year exceeds ` 5,00,000.

               In the given case, no liability to deduct tax at source is attracted as the
               payment made does not exceed ` 5,00,000.

       (vi) As per section 194H, tax is deductible at source if the amount of
               commission or brokerage or the aggregate of the amounts of
               commission or brokerage credited or paid during the financial year
               exceeds ` 20,000.

               Since the commission payment made to Mr. Y does not exceed
               ` 20,000, the provisions of section 194H are not attracted.

3. (a) Since the rent paid for hire of machinery by B. Ltd. to Mr. Raman
               exceeds ` 50,000 per month or part of the month, the provisions of
               section 194-I for deduction of tax at source are attracted.

               The rate applicable for deduction of tax at source under section 194-I
               on rent paid for hire of plant and machinery is 2%, assuming that
               Mr. Raman had furnished his permanent account number to B Ltd.

               Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source:

               = ` 6,60,000 x 2% = ` 13,200.

               Note: In case Mr. Raman does not furnish his permanent account
               number to B Ltd., tax shall be deducted @ 20% on ` 6,60,000, by
               virtue of provisions of section 206AA.

       (b) As per the provisions of section 194J, a Hindu Undivided Family is
               required to deduct tax at source on fees paid for professional services
               only if the total sales, gross receipts or turnover form the business or
               profession exceed ` 1 crore in case of business or ` 50 lakhs in case of
               profession, as the case may be, in the financial year preceding the
               current financial year and such payment made for professional
               services is not exclusively for the personal purpose of any member of
               Hindu Undivided Family.

               Section 194M, provides for deduction of tax at source by a HUF (which
               is not required to deduct tax at source under section 194J) in respect
               of fees for professional service if such sum or aggregate of such sum
               exceeds ` 50 lakhs during the financial year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a 7.129  a

               In the given case, the fees for professional service to Dr. Srivatsan is
               paid on 1.12.2025 for a personal purpose, therefore, section 194J is
               not attracted. Section 194M would have been attracted if the payment
               or aggregate of payments exceeded ` 50 lakhs in the P.Y.2025-26.
               However, since the payment does not exceed ` 50 lakh in this case,
               there is no liability to deduct tax at source under section 194M also.

       (c) Section 194J provides for deduction of tax at source @10% from any sum
               paid by way of any remuneration or fees or commission, by whatever
               name called, to a resident director, which is not in the nature of salary on
               which tax is deductible under section 192. The threshold limit of ` 50,000
               upto which the provisions of tax deduction at source are not attracted in
               respect of every other payment covered under section 194J is, however,
               not applicable in respect of sum paid to a director.

               Therefore, tax@10% has to be deducted at source under section 194J
               in respect of the sum of ` 19,000 paid by ABC Ltd. to its director.

               Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source:

               = ` 19,000 x 10% = ` 1,900

4. (1) Provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C are attracted
               in respect of payment by a company to a sub-contractor. Under
               section 194C, tax is deductible at the time of credit or payment,
               whichever is earlier @1% in case the payment is made to an individual.

               Since the aggregate amount credited or paid during the year is
               ` 4,20,000, tax is deductible @1% on ` 4,20,000.

               Tax to be deducted = ` 4,20,000 x 1% = ` 4,200

       (2) Under section 194BB, tax is to be deducted at source, if the winnings
               from horse races exceed ` 10,000 in respect of a single transaction.
               The rate of deduction of tax at source is 30%.

               Hence, tax to be deducted = ` 1,50,000 x 30% = ` 45,000.

       (3) As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a
               resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on
               account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable
               property, is required to deduct tax at source, if such payment or the
               aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the
               financial year exceeds ` 5,00,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
a  7.130  INCOME TAX LAW

               In the given case, there is no liability to deduct tax at source as the
               payment made to Mr. A does not exceed ` 5,00,000.

5. The proviso to section 234C contains the provisions for payment of advance
       tax in case of capital gains and casual income.

       Advance tax is payable by an assessee on his/its total income, which
       includes capital gains and casual income like income from lotteries,
       crossword puzzles, etc.

       Since it is not possible for the assessee to estimate his capital gains, or
       income from lotteries etc., it has been provided that if any such income
       arises after the due date for any instalment, then, the entire amount of the
       tax payable (after considering tax deducted at source) on such capital gains
       or casual income should be paid in the remaining instalments of advance
       tax, which are due.

       Where no such instalment is due, the entire tax should be paid by 31st
       March of the relevant financial year.

       No interest liability on late payment would arise if the entire tax liability is so paid.

        Note: In case of casual income the entire tax liability is fully deductible at
        source @30% under section 194B, 194BA and 194BB. Therefore, advance tax
        liability would arise only if the surcharge, if any, and health and education
        cess@4% in respect thereof, along with tax liability in respect of other income,
        if any, is 10,000 or more.

6. (i) M/s. Thomas Cook, being a seller of an overseas tour programme
               package has to collect tax at source @5% till ` 10 lakhs and 20%
               thereafter under section 206C(1G) from Mr. Raja on receiving amount
               for purchase of package.

               M/s Thomas Cook has to collect tax of ` 90,000, being ` 50,000 (5% of
               ` 10 lakhs) and ` 40,000 (20% of ` 2 lakhs).

               Bank of India, being an authorized dealer has to collect tax at source
               under section 206C(1G) @20% on amount in excess of ` 10 lakhs
               remitted under the LRS since the remittance of ` 13 lakhs is not for
               the purpose of education and medical treatment.

               Bank of India has to collect tax of ` 60,000 i.e., 20% of ` 3 lakhs, being
               the amount remitted in excess of ` 10 lakhs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS                           a 7.131  a

(ii) As per section 194-IA, if a person (transferor) transfers any immovable
        property whose consideration for transfer or stamp duty value is not
        less than ` 50 lakh to a person (transferee), then transferee is required
        to deduct tax at source @1% of consideration for transfer or stamp
        duty value, whichever is higher.

        In case there are multiple transferee or transferor in respect of any
        immovable property, consideration shall be the aggregate of the
        amounts paid or payable by all the transferees to the transferor or all
        the transferors for transfer of such immovable property.

        Accordingly, in the present case, Ms. Shashi and Ms. Sujata are
        required to deduct tax at source @1% on  75 lakhs, being the
        amount higher of consideration of ` 60 lakhs and stamp duty value of
        ` 75 lakhs.

(iii) As per section 194R, if any person (other than an individual or HUF
       whose total sales or gross receipts does not exceed ` 1 crore in case of
       business or ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the immediately
       preceding previous year) provides any benefit or perquisite to a
       resident arising from his business or profession and the total value of
       such benefits exceeds ` 20,000 in a financial year, then such person is
       required to deduct tax at source @10% of the total value of the
       benefit or perquisite. Where the benefit or perquisite is in kind, the
       person has to ensure before releasing such benefit or perquisite that
       the tax required to be deducted has been paid in respect of such
       benefit or perquisite.

       In the present case, XYZ Ltd. provided a luxury car worth  15 lakh to
        Mr. A, as an incentive which qualifies as a perquisite u/s 194R.
        Therefore, XYZ Ltd. has to ensure before releasing the car that the tax
        of ` 1,50,000 i.e., 10% of ` 15 lakhs has been paid by Mr. A.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    a  7.132              INCOME TAX LAW

7.     Determination of Advance Tax Liability of Mr. Sameer

                                          Particulars             `
       Estimated tax liability for the financial year 2025-26
       Less: Tax deducted at source                             80,000
       Tax payable                                              12,000
                                                                68,000

            Due Date of       Amount payable                                  `
            installment
                          Not less than 15% of                                         10,200
       On or before 15th  advance tax liability                                        20,400
       June, 2025                                               (` 30,600, being 45% of
                                                                     ` 68,000 - ` 10,200)
       On or before 15th  Not less than 45% of
       September, 2025    advance tax liability less                                   20,400
                          amount paid in earlier                (` 51,000, being 75% of
                          installment
                                                                     ` 68,000 - ` 30,600)
       On or before 15th  Not less than 75% of
       December, 2025     advance tax liability less                                   17,000
                          amount paid in earlier                  (` 68,000, being 100%
                          installment(s)                         of ` 68,000 - ` 51,000)

       On or before 15th  Whole of the advance
       March, 2026
                          tax liability less amount

                          paid                     in  earlier

                          installment(s)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
