CHAPTER  4

INCOME OF OTHER
PERSONS INCLUDED
IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL
INCOME

                                      LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to -

 identify when clubbing provisions are attracted and apply the same
       in computing total income of the assessee;

 examine the circumstances when income of the spouse is included in
       the income of the individual and apply the same in computing total
       income of the individual;

 examine the circumstances when income of son's wife is included in
       the hands of the individual and apply the same in computing total
       income of the individual;

 identify the nature of income of minor, in respect of which clubbing
       provisions are not attracted;

 examine how minor's income is included in the hands of the parent
       and compute the amount to be included in the hands of the parent;

 examine the circumstances when income of HUF is included in the
       hands of a member of the HUF.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.2  INCOME TAX LAW

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.3
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

    1. CLUBBING OF INCOME ­ AN INTRODUCTION

Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, an assessee is generally taxed in respect of his
own income. However, there are certain cases where an assessee has to pay tax in
respect of income of another person. The provisions for the same are contained in
sections 60 to 64 of the Act. These provisions have been enacted to counteract
the tendency on the part of the tax-payers to dispose of their property or transfer
their income in such a way that their tax liability can be avoided or reduced.

These provisions can be categorized as follows:

· Income of other persons included in an assessee's total income [Sections 60-63]

· Income of other persons included in an Individual's total income [Section 64]

Note - In the case of individuals, income-tax is levied on a slab system on the total
income. The tax system is progressive i.e. as the income increases, the applicable rate
of tax increases. Some taxpayers in the higher income bracket have a tendency to
divert some portion of their income to their spouse, minor child etc. to minimize their
tax burden. In order to prevent such tax avoidance, clubbing provisions have been
incorporated in the Act, under which income arising to certain persons (like spouse,
minor child etc.) have to be included in the income of the person who has diverted
his income for the purpose of computing tax liability.

    2. INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDIBLE IN
          ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

2.1 Transfer of income without transfer of asset [Section 60]

(i) If any person transfers the income from any asset without transferring the
       asset itself, such income is to be included in the total income of the
       transferor.

(ii) It is immaterial whether the transfer is revocable or irrevocable and whether
       it was made before the commencement of this Act or after its
       commencement.

Example 1: Mr. A confers the right to receive rent in respect of his house property
to his wife, Mrs. A, without transferring the house itself to her. In this case, the rent
received by Mrs. A will be clubbed with the income of Mr. A.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.4  INCOME TAX LAW

ILLUSTRATION 1

Mr. Vatsan has transferred, through a duly registered document, the income arising
from a godown to his son, without transferring the godown. In whose hands will the
rental income from godown be charged?

SOLUTION

Section 60 expressly states that where there is transfer of income from an asset
without transfer of the asset itself, such income shall be included in the total
income of the transferor. Hence, the rental income derived from the godown shall
be clubbed in the hands of Mr. Vatsan.

2.2 Income arising from revocable transfer of assets
      [Section 61]

All income arising to any person by virtue of a revocable transfer of assets is to be
included in the total income of the transferor.

Meaning of revocable transfer [Section 63]
Transfer is deemed to be revocable if--
(a) it contains any provision for the retransfer, directly or indirectly, of the

       whole or any part of the income or assets to the transferor, or
(b) it gives, in any way to the transferor, a right to reassume power, directly or

       indirectly, over the whole or any part of the income or the assets.

               Clubbing provision will operate even if only part of income of the
               transferred asset had been applied for the benefit of the transferor.
               Once the transfer is revocable, the entire income from the transferred
asset is includible in the total income of the transferor.

Exception where clubbing provisions are not attracted even in case of
revocable transfer [Section 62]
Section 61 will not apply to any income arising to any person if there is ­
(i) a transfer by way of trust which is not revocable during the life time of the

       beneficiary; and
(ii) any other transfer, which is not revocable during the life time of the

       transferee.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.5
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

In the above cases, the income from the transferred asset is not includible in the
total income of the transferor, provided the transferor derives no direct or indirect
benefit from such income.

If the transferor receives direct or indirect benefit from such income, such income
is to be included in his total income even though the transfer may not be
revocable during the life time of the beneficiary or transferee, as the case may be.

As and when the power to revoke the transfer arises, the income arising by virtue
of such transfer will be included in the total income of the transferor.

Example 2: Mr. Rajesh transfers his house property to a trust for the benefit of
Mr. Ramesh till his death. This is a situation of irrevocable transfer till the death of
Mr. Ramesh. Hence, till then, the income from house property would be taxable in
the hands of the transferee i.e., the trust. However, after the death of Mr. Ramesh,
the income from house property would be included in the total income of
Mr. Rajesh as on that date, the transfer has become revocable.

    3. INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDIBLE IN
          INDIVIDUAL'S TOTAL INCOME

3.1 Clubbing of income arising to spouse

(I) Income by way of remuneration from a concern in which the individual
       has substantial interest [Section 64(1)(ii)]

(i) Remuneration in cash or kind to spouse from a concern in which the
       individual has a substantial interest to be clubbed: In computing the
       total income of any individual, all such income which arises, directly or
       indirectly, to the spouse of such individual by way of salary, commission,
       fees or any other form of remuneration, whether in cash or in kind, from a
       concern in which such individual has a substantial interest shall be included.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.6  INCOME TAX LAW

Circumstances when an individual is deemed to have
              substantial interest in a concern

Where the concern is a company                     In any other case

 If equity shares carrying 20% or                   If such person is entitled, or such
     more of voting power are                         person and one or more of his
                                                        relatives are entitled in the
beneficially owned by such person
or partly by such person and partly                aggregate, to receive 20% or more
 by one or more of his relatives at                profit of such concern at any time

       any time during the P.Y.                                  during the P.Y.

       The term `relative' in relation to an individual means the husband, wife,
       brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant of that individual
       [Section 2(41)].

(ii) Clubbing provisions will not apply where remuneration is received on
       account of technical or professional qualifications: Clubbing provisions,
       however, does not apply where the spouse of the said individual possesses
       technical or professional qualifications and the income to the spouse is
       solely attributable to the application of his/her technical or professional
       knowledge or experience. In such an event, the income arising to such
       spouse is to be assessed in his/her hands.

(iii) Both husband and wife have substantial interest in a concern: Where
       both husband and wife have substantial interest in a concern and both are
       in receipt of income by way of salary etc. from the said concern, such
       income will be includible in the hands of that spouse, whose total income,
       excluding such income is higher.

                 Where any such income is once included in the total income of either
                 spouse, income arising in the succeeding year shall not be included in the
                 total income of the other spouse unless the Assessing Officer is satisfied,
 after giving that spouse an opportunity of being heard, that it is necessary to do so.

ILLUSTRATION 2

Mr. A holds shares carrying 25% voting power in X (P) Ltd. Mrs. A is working as a
computer software programmer in X (P) Ltd. at a salary of ` 30,000 p.m. She is,
however, not qualified for the job. The other income of Mr. A & Mrs. A are

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                                    4.7
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

` 7,00,000 & ` 4,00,000, respectively. Compute the gross total income of Mr. A and
Mrs. A for the A.Y.2026-27 if they are paying tax under default tax regime

SOLUTION

Mr. A holds shares carrying 25% voting power in X (P) Ltd i.e., a substantial interest in
the company. His wife is working in the same company without any professional
qualifications for the same. Thus, by virtue of the clubbing provisions of the Act, the
salary received by Mrs. A from X (P) Ltd. will be clubbed in the hands of Mr. A.

              Computation of Gross total income of Mr. A

                    Particulars                    `                     `

Salary received by Mrs. A (` 30,000 × 12)          3,60,000

Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia)      75,000 2,85,000

Other Income                                                             7,00,000

Gross total income                                                       9,85,000

The gross total income of Mrs. A is ` 4,00,000.

ILLUSTRATION 3

Will your answer be different if Mrs. A was qualified for the job?

SOLUTION

If Mrs. A possesses professional qualifications for the job, then the clubbing
provisions shall not be applicable.

Gross total income of Mr. A = ` 7,00,000 [Other income].

Gross total income of Mrs. A = Salary received by Mrs. A [` 30,000×12] less
` 75,000, being the standard deduction under section 16(ia) plus other income
[` 4,00,000] = ` 6,85,000

ILLUSTRATION 4

Mr. B holds shares carrying 30% voting power in Y (P) Ltd. Mrs. B is working as
accountant in Y (P) Ltd. getting income under the head salary (computed) of
` 3,44,000 without any qualification in accountancy. Mr. B also receives ` 30,000 as
interest on securities. Mrs. B owns a house property which she has let out. Rent
received from tenants is ` 6,000 p.m. Compute the gross total income of Mr. B and
Mrs. B for the A.Y.2026-27.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.8  INCOME TAX LAW

SOLUTION

Since Mrs. B is not professionally qualified for the job, the clubbing provisions
shall be applicable.

                       Computation of Gross total income of Mr. B     `
                                                                   3,44,000
                                      Particulars
Income under the head "Salary" of Mrs. B (Computed)                  30,000
Income from other sources                                          3,74,000
- Interest on securities
Gross total income

Computation of Gross total income of Mrs. B

                              Particulars            `              `
Income from Salary                                                      Nil
[Clubbed in the hands of Mr. B]                    72,000
Income from house property                                 -       50,400
Gross Annual Value [` 6,000 × 12]                                  50,400
Less: Municipal taxes paid                         72,000
Net Annual Value (NAV)                             21,600
Less: Deductions under section 24
                                                           -
     - 30% of NAV i.e., 30% of ` 72,000
     - Interest on loan
Gross total income

(II) Income arising to the spouse from an asset transferred without
       adequate consideration [Section 64(1)(iv)]

(i) Transfer of asset (other than house property): Where there is a transfer
       of an asset (other than house property), directly or indirectly, from one
       spouse to the other, without adequate consideration or otherwise than in
       connection with an agreement to live apart, any income arising to the
       transferee-spouse from the transferred asset, either directly or indirectly,
       shall be included in the total income of the transferor-spouse.

(ii) Transfer of house property: In the case of transfer of house property, the
       provisions are contained in section 27. If an individual transfers a house

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.9
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

property to his spouse, without adequate consideration or otherwise than in
connection with an agreement to live apart, the transferor shall be deemed
to be the owner of the house property and its annual value will be taxed in
his hands.

(iii) Income from accretion of the transferred asset: It may be noted that any
       income from the accretion of the transferred asset is not to be clubbed with
       the income of the transferor. i.e., the income arising on transferred assets
       alone have to be clubbed. Income earned by investing such income (arising
       from transferred asset) cannot be clubbed.

(iv) Meaning of adequate consideration: It is also to be noted that natural
       love and affection do not constitute adequate consideration. Therefore,
       where an asset is transferred without adequate consideration, the income
       from such asset will be clubbed in the hands of the transferor.

(v) Transferred asset invested in business: Where the assets transferred,
       directly or indirectly, by an individual to his spouse are invested by the
       transferee in the business, proportionate income arising to the transferee
       from such investment is to be included in the total income of the transferor.
       If the investment is in the nature of contribution of capital, proportionate
       interest receivable by the transferee from the firm will be clubbed with the
       income of the transferor.

Such proportion has to be computed by taking into account the value of
the aforesaid investment as on the first day of the previous year to the
total investment in the business or by way of capital contribution in a firm
as a partner, as the case may be, by the transferee as on that day.

ILLUSTRATION 5

Mr. Vaibhav started a proprietary business on 01.04.2024 with a capital of
` 5,00,000. He incurred a loss of ` 2,00,000 during the year 2024-25. To overcome the
financial position, his wife Mrs. Vaishaly, a software Engineer, gave a gift of
` 5,00,000 on 01.04.2025, which was immediately invested in the business by
Mr. Vaibhav. He earned a profit of ` 4,00,000 during the year 2025-26. Compute the
amount to be clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the A.Y. 2026-27. If
Mrs. Vaishaly gave the said amount as loan, what would be the amount to be clubbed?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          4.10          INCOME TAX LAW

SOLUTION

Section 64(1)(iv) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for the clubbing of income
in the hands of the individual, if the income earned is from the assets (other than
house property) transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse of the individual,
otherwise than for adequate consideration or in connection with an agreement to
live apart.

In this case, Mr. Vaibhav received a gift of ` 5,00,000 on 1.4.2025 from his wife
Mrs. Vaishaly, which he invested in his business immediately. The income to be
clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the A.Y. 2026-27 is computed as follows:

        Particulars      Mr. Vaibhav's                                  Capital          Total (`)
                              capital                            contribution out
Capital as on 1.4.2025                                           of gift from Mrs.       8,00,000
                        contribution (`)                                                 4,00,000
Profit for P.Y.2025-26                                              Vaishaly (`)
to be apportioned on                               3,00,000
the basis of capital                                                           5,00,000
employed on the first
day of the previous     (5,00,000 ­ 2,00,000)
year i.e., as on
1.4.2025 (3:5)                                     1,50,000            2,50,000

                          4,                       00,000×  3      4,  00,000×  5  
                                                            8                   8  

Therefore, the income to be clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the
A.Y.2026-27 is ` 2,50,000.

In case Mrs. Vaishaly gave the said amount of ` 5,00,000 as a bona fide loan, then,
clubbing provisions would not be attracted.

Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the hands of
Mr. Vaibhav, since he has received a sum of money exceeding ` 50,000 without
consideration from a relative i.e., his wife.

(III) Transfer of assets for the benefit of spouse [Section 64(1)(vii)]

All income arising directly or indirectly to any person or association of persons,
from the assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to such person or association of
persons by an individual without adequate consideration is includible in the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.11
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

income of the individual to the extent such income is used by the transferee for
the immediate or deferred benefit of the transferor's spouse.

3.2 Clubbing of income arising to son's wife

(I) Income arising to son's wife from the assets transferred without
       adequate consideration by the father-in-law or mother-in-law
       [Section 64(1)(vi)]

(i) Asset transferred without adequate consideration: Where an asset is
       transferred, directly or indirectly, by an individual to his or her son's wife
       without adequate consideration, the income from such asset is to be
       included in the total income of the transferor.

(ii) Asset transferred invested in the business: For this purpose, where the
       assets transferred directly or indirectly by an individual to his or her son's
       wife are invested by the transferee in the business, proportionate income
       arising from such investment is to be included in the total income of the
       transferor. If the investment is in the nature of contribution of capital, the
       proportionate interest receivable from firm will be clubbed with the income
       of the transferor.

        Such proportion has to be computed by taking into account the value of
       the aforesaid investment as on the first day of the previous year to the
       total investment in the business or by way of capital contribution in a firm
       as a partner, as the case may be, by the transferee as on that day.

(II) Transfer of assets for the benefit of son's wife [Section 64(1)(viii)]

       All income arising directly or indirectly, to any person or association of
       persons from the assets transferred, directly or indirectly, without adequate
       consideration, to such person or association of persons by an individual will
       be included in the total income of the individual to the extent such income
       is used by the transferee for the immediate or deferred benefit of the
       transferor's son's wife.

                        Where any asset is transferred by a person to any other person
                        without consideration or for inadequate consideration, the
                        provisions of 56(2)(x) would get attracted in the hands of
       transferee, if conditions specified thereunder are satisfied.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.12  INCOME TAX LAW

ILLUSTRATION 6

Mrs. Kasturi transferred her immovable property to ABC Co. Ltd. subject to a
condition that out of the rental income, a sum of ` 36,000 per annum shall be
utilized for the benefit of her son's wife.

Mrs. Kasturi claims that the amount of ` 36,000 (utilized by her son's wife) should
not be included in her total income as she no longer owned the property.

Examine with reasons whether the contention of Mrs. Kasturi is valid in law.

SOLUTION

The clubbing provisions under section 64(1)(viii) are attracted in case of transfer
of any asset, directly or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate consideration, to
any person to the extent to which the income from such asset is for the
immediate or deferred benefit of son's wife. Such income shall be included in
computing the total income of the transferor-individual.

Therefore, income of ` 36,000 meant for the benefit of daughter-in-law is
chargeable to tax in the hands of transferor i.e., Mrs. Kasturi in this case.

The contention of Mrs. Kasturi is, hence, not valid in law.

In order to attract the clubbing provisions under section 64(1)(viii), the transfer
should be otherwise than for adequate consideration. In this case, it is presumed
that the transfer is otherwise than for adequate consideration and therefore, the
clubbing provisions are attracted. Moreover, the provisions of section 56(2)(x)
would also get attracted in the hands of ABC Co Ltd., if the conditions specified
thereunder are satisfied.

Note ­ If the transfer was for adequate consideration, the provisions of section
64(1)(viii) would not be attracted.

3.3 Clubbing of minor's income [Section 64(1A)]

(i) All income of a minor is to be included in the income of his or her parent.

(ii) However, the income derived by the minor from manual work or from any
       activity involving his skill, talent or specialised knowledge or experience will
       not be included in the income of his parent.

(iii) The income of the minor will be included in the income of that parent,
       whose total income, excluding minor's income, is greater.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.13
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

(iv) Once clubbing of minor's income is done with that of one parent, it will
       continue to be clubbed with that parent only, in subsequent years. The
       Assessing Officer, may, however, club the minor's income with that of the
       other parent, if, after giving the other parent an opportunity to be heard, he
       is satisfied that it is necessary to do so.

(v) Where the marriage of the parents does not subsist, the income of the
       minor will be includible in the income of that parent who maintains the
       minor child in the relevant previous year.

(vi) However, the income of a minor child suffering from any disability of the
       nature specified in section 80U shall not be included in the hands of the
       parent but shall be assessed in the hands of the child.

(vii) It may be noted that the clubbing provisions are attracted even in respect of
       income of minor married daughter.

Exemption in respect of clubbed income of minor [Section 10(32)]

In case the income of an individual (i.e. the parent) includes the income of his
minor child in terms of section 64(1A), such parent shall be entitled to exemption
of ` 1,500 in respect of each minor child. However, if income of any minor so
includible is less than ` 1,500, then, the entire income shall be exempt.

Exemption under section 10(32) would be available to the parent only if he/she
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). The same would not be available to him/her under the
default tax regime where he/she computes his/her total income as per section
115BAC and pays tax at the concessional rates provided thereunder.

(viii) In case the asset transferred to a minor child (not being a minor married
       daughter) without consideration or for inadequate consideration is a house
       property, then, by virtue of section 27(i), the transferor-parent will be the
       deemed owner of the house property. Therefore, the income from house
       property will be taxable in the hands of the transferor-parent, being the
       deemed owner and not in the hands of the minor child. Consequently,
       clubbing provisions under section 64(1A) would not be attracted in respect
       of such income, due to which the benefit of exemption u/s 10(32) (discussed
       above) cannot be availed against such income.

However, if the house property is transferred by a parent to his or her minor
married daughter, without consideration or for inadequate consideration,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          4.14  INCOME TAX LAW

then, section 27(i) is not attracted. In such a case, the income from house
property will be included u/s 64(1A) in the hands of that parent, whose total
income before including minor child's income is higher; and benefit of
exemption u/s 10(32) can be availed by that parent in respect of the income
so included if he/she exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

ILLUSTRATION 7

Mr. A has three minor children ­ two twin daughters, aged 12 years, and one son,
aged 16 years. Income of the twin daughters is ` 2,000 p.a. each and that of the son
is ` 1,200 p.a. Mrs. A has transferred her flat to her minor son on 1.4.2025 out of
natural love and affection. The flat was let out on the same date and the rental
income from the flat is ` 10,000 p.m. Compute the income, in respect of minor
children, to be included in the hands of Mr. A and Mrs. A u/s 64(1A) (assuming that
Mr. A's total income is higher than Mrs. A's total income, before including the
income of minor children and both Mr. A and Mrs. A exercise the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

SOLUTION

Taxable income, in respect of minor children, in the hands of Mr. A is:

                              Particulars           `                    `
Twin minor daughters [` 2,000 × 2]                 4,000                 1,000
Less: Exempt under section 10(32) [` 1,500 × 2]    3,000

Minor son                                          1,200                     Nil
Less: Exempt under section 10(32)                  1,200                 1,000
Income to be clubbed in the hands of Mr. A

Note ­ As per section 27(i), Mrs. A is the deemed owner of house property
transferred to her minor son. Natural love and affection do not constitute adequate
consideration for this purpose. Accordingly, the income from house property of
` 84,000 [i.e., ` 1,20,000 (-) ` 36,000, being 30% of ` 1,20,000) would be taxable
directly in her hands as the deemed owner of the said property. Consequently,
clubbing provisions under section 64(1A) would not be attracted in respect of
income from house property, owing to which exemption u/s 10(32) cannot be
availed by her.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.15
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

ILLUSTRATION 8

Compute the gross total income of Mr. A & Mrs. A from the following information
assuming both exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A):

                                         Particulars                `
(a) Salary income (computed) of Mrs. A                           2,30,000
(b) Income from profession of Mr. A                              3,90,000
(c) Income of minor son B from company deposit
(d) Income of minor daughter C from special talent                 15,000
(e) Interest from bank received by C on deposit made out of her    32,000

      special talent                                                 3,000
(f) Gift received by C on 30.09.2025 from friend of Mrs. A           2,500

Brief working is sufficient. Detailed computation under various heads of income is
not required.

SOLUTION

As per the provisions of section 64(1A) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, all the
income of a minor child has to be clubbed in the hands of that parent whose total
income (excluding the income of the minor) is greater. The income of Mr. A is
` 3,90,000 and income of Mrs. A is ` 2,30,000. Since the income of Mr. A is greater
than that of Mrs. A, the income of the minor children have to be clubbed in the
hands of Mr. A. It is assumed that this is the first year when clubbing provisions
are attracted.

Income derived by a minor child from any activity involving application of his/her
skill, talent, specialised knowledge and experience is not to be clubbed. Hence,
the income of minor child C from exercise of special talent will not be clubbed.

However, interest from bank deposit has to be clubbed even when deposit is
made out of income arising from application of special talent.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.16  INCOME TAX LAW

The Gross Total Income of Mrs. A is ` 2,30,000. The total income of Mr. A giving
effect to the provisions of section 64(1A) is as follows:

Computation of gross total income of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2026-27

                              Particulars                      `        `
Income from profession                                               3,90,000
Income of minor son B from company deposit                   15,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(32)                          1,500    13,500
Income of minor daughter C
From special talent ­ not to be clubbed                           -
Interest from bank                                           3,000
Gift of ` 2,500 received from a non-relative is not taxable
under section 56(2)(x) being less than the aggregate limit      Nil      1,500
of ` 50,000                                                  3,000   4,05,000
                                                             1,500
Less: Exemption under section 10(32)
Gross Total Income

     4. CROSS TRANSFERS

In the case of cross transfers also (e.g., A making gift of ` 50,000 to the wife of his
brother B for the purchase of a house by her and a simultaneous gift by B to A's
minor son of shares in a foreign company worth ` 50,000 owned by him), the
income from the assets transferred would be assessed in the hands of the
deemed transferor if the transfers are so intimately connected as to form part of a
single transaction, and each transfer constitutes consideration for the other by
being mutual or otherwise. Thus, in the instant case, the transfers have been
made by A and B to persons who are not their spouse or minor child so as to
circumvent the provisions of this section, showing that such transfers constituted
consideration for each other.

The Supreme Court, in case of CIT v. Keshavji Morarji [1967] 66 ITR 142, observed
that if two transactions are inter-connected and are parts of the same transaction
in such a way that it can be said that the circuitous method was adopted as a
device to evade tax, the implication of clubbing provisions would be attracted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.17
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

Accordingly, the income arising to Mrs. B from the house property should be
included in the total income of B and the dividend from shares transferred to A's
minor son would be taxable in the hands of A, assuming that Mr. A's income is
higher than that of Mrs. A. This is because A and B are the indirect transferors to
their minor child and spouse, respectively, of income-yielding assets, so as to
reduce their burden of taxation.

ILLUSTRATION 9

Mr. Vasudevan gifted a sum of ` 6 lakhs to his brother's wife on 14-06-2025. On
12-07-2025, his brother gifted a sum of ` 5 lakhs to Mr. Vasudevan's wife. The
gifted amounts were invested as fixed deposits in banks by Mrs. Vasudevan and wife
of Mr. Vasudevan's brother on 01-08-2025 at 9% interest. Examine the
consequences of the above under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the
hands of Mr. Vasudevan and his brother.

SOLUTION

In the given case, Mr. Vasudevan gifted a sum of ` 6 lakhs to his brother's wife on
14.06.2025 and simultaneously, his brother gifted a sum of ` 5 lakhs to
Mr. Vasudevan's wife on 12.07.2025. The gifted amounts were invested as fixed
deposits in banks by Mrs. Vasudevan and his brother's wife. These transfers are in
the nature of cross transfers. Accordingly, the income from the assets transferred
would be assessed in the hands of the deemed transferor because the transfers
are so intimately connected to form part of a single transaction and each transfer
constitutes consideration for the other by being mutual or otherwise.

If two transactions are inter-connected and are part of the same transaction in
such a way that it can be said that the circuitous method was adopted as a device
to evade tax, the implication of clubbing provisions would be attracted. It was so
held by the Apex Court in CIT vs. Keshavji Morarji (1967) 66 ITR 142.

Accordingly, the interest income arising to Mrs. Vasudevan in the form of interest
on fixed deposits would be included in the total income of Mr. Vasudevan and
interest income arising in the hands of his brother's wife would be taxable in the
hands of Mr. Vasudevan's brother as per section 64(1), to the extent of amount of
cross transfers i.e., ` 5 lakhs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.18  INCOME TAX LAW

This is because both Mr. Vasudevan and his brother are the indirect transferors of
the income to their respective spouses with an intention to reduce their burden of
taxation.

However, the interest income earned by his spouse on fixed deposit of ` 5 lakhs
alone would be included in the hands of Mr. Vasudevan's brother and not the
interest income on the entire fixed deposit of ` 6 lakhs, since the cross transfer is
only to the extent of ` 5 lakhs.

     5. CONVERSION OF SELF-ACQUIRED PROPERTY
          INTO THE PROPERTY OF A HINDU
          UNDIVIDED FAMILY [SECTION 64(2)]

Section 64(2) deals with the case of conversion of self-acquired property into
property of a Hindu undivided family.

(i) Where an individual, who is a member of the HUF, converts at any time after
       31-12-1969, his individual property into property of the HUF of which he is
       a member or throws such property into the common stock of the family or
       otherwise transfers such individual property, directly or indirectly, to the
       family otherwise than for adequate consideration, the income from such
       property shall continue to be included in the total income of the individual.

(ii) Where the converted property has been partitioned, either by way of total
       or partial partition, the income derived from such converted property as is
       received by the spouse on partition will be deemed to arise to the spouse
       from assets transferred indirectly by the individual to the spouse and
       consequently, such income shall also be included in the total income of the
       individual who effected the conversion of such property.

(iii) Where income from the converted property is included in the total income
       of an individual under section 64(2), it will be excluded from the total
       income of the family or, as the case may be, of the spouse of the individual.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.19
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

    6. INCOME INCLUDES LOSS

As per the Explanation 2 to section 64, `income' would include `loss'. Accordingly,
where the specified income to be included in the total income of the individual is
a loss, such loss will be taken into account while computing the total income of
the individual. It is significant to note that this Explanation applies to clubbing
provisions under both sections 64(1) and 64(2).

     7. DISTINCTION BETWEEN SECTION 61 AND
          SECTION 64

It may be noted that the main distinction between the two sections is that
section 61 applies only to a revocable transfer made by any person while section
64 applies to revocable as well as irrevocable transfers made only by individuals.

               Clubbing provisions are attracted in respect of income arising from the
               assets transferred, however, income arising on accretion of income arising
               from transferred asset, would not be clubbed except in case of minor child.

Example 3: Mr. X transferred debentures of ` 50,000 carrying 10% p.a. interest to
his wife. The interest income of ` 5,000 would be clubbed in the hands of Mr. X.
However, in case his wife deposited ` 5,000 in fixed deposits @8% p.a., the interest
income of ` 400 arising on FDR would not be clubbed in the hands of Mr. X.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           4.20                  INCOME TAX LAW

           LET US RECAPITULATE

Section    Income to be                            Content
   60         clubbed
   61
           Income                When a person transfers the income accruing
64(1)(ii)  transferred           from an asset without the transfer of the
64(1)(iv)  without transfer      asset itself, such income is to be included in
           of asset              the total income of the transferor, whether
                                 the transfer is revocable or irrevocable.

           Income arising        Such income is to be included in the hands of
           from revocable        the transferor.
           transfer of assets
                                 A transfer is deemed to be revocable if it ­

                                 (i) contains any provision for re-transfer of
                                      the whole or any part of the income or
                                      assets to the transferor; or

                                 (ii) gives right to re-assume power over the
                                      whole or any part of the income or the
                                      asset.

           Income arising to     Such income arising to spouse is to be
           spouse by way of      included in the total income of the individual.
           remuneration from
           a concern in which    However, if remuneration received is
           the individual has    attributable to the application of technical or
           substantial interest  professional knowledge and experience of
                                 spouse, then, such income is not to be clubbed.

           Income arising to     Income arising from an asset (other than
                                 house property) transferred otherwise than
           spouse         from   for adequate consideration or not in
                                 connection with an agreement to live apart,
           assets transferred    from one spouse to another shall be included
                                 in the total income of the transferor.
           without adequate
                                 However, this provision will not apply in the
           consideration         case of transfer of house property, since the
                                 transferor-spouse would be the deemed
                                 owner as per section 27.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.21
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

 64(1)(vi)   Income arising to   Income arising from an asset transferred
             son's wife from an  otherwise than for adequate consideration, by
64(1)(vii)/  asset transferred   an individual to his or her son's wife shall be
64(1)(viii)  without adequate    included in the total income of the transferor.
             consideration
  64(1A)
             Income arising      All income arising to any person or
             from transfer of    association of persons from assets transferred
             assets for the      without adequate consideration is includible
             benefit of spouse   in the income of the transferor, to the extent
             or son's wife       such income is used by the transferee for the
                                 immediate or deferred benefit of the
                                 transferor's spouse or son's wife.

             Income of minor     All income arising or accruing to a minor
             child               child (including a minor married daughter)
                                 shall be included in the total income of his or
                                 her parent.

                                 The income of the minor child shall be
                                 included with the income of that parent,
                                 whose total income, before including minor's
                                 income, is higher.

                                 Where the marriage of the parents does not
                                 subsist, the income of the minor will be
                                 includible in the income of that parent who
                                 maintains the minor child in the relevant
                                 previous year.

                                 The parent, in whose total income, the
                                 income of the minor child or children are
                                 included, shall be entitled to exemption of
                                 such income subject to a maximum of ` 1,500
                                 per child under section 10(32).

                                 Exemption under section 10(32) would be
                                 available to an assessee only if he exercises
                                 the option of shifting out of the default tax
                                 regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

                                 The following income of a minor child shall,
                                 however, not be clubbed in the hands of his
                                 or her parent ­

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       4.22               INCOME TAX LAW

                          (a) Income from manual work done by him
                               or activity involving application of
                               minor's skill, talent or specialized
                               knowledge and experience; and

                          (b) Income of a minor child suffering from
                               any disability specified in section 80U.

                          In case the asset transferred to a minor child
                          (not being a minor married daughter) without
                          consideration or for inadequate consideration
                          is house property, then, by virtue of section
                          27(i), the transferor-parent will be the
                          deemed owner of the house property.
                          Therefore, the income from house property
                          will be taxable in the hands of the transferor-
                          parent, being the deemed owner and not in
                          the hands of the minor child. Consequently,
                          clubbing provisions u/s 64(1A) would not be
                          attracted in respect of such income, due to
                          which the benefit of exemption u/s 10(32)
                          cannot be availed against such income.

                          However, if the house property is transferred
                          by a parent to his or her minor married
                          daughter without consideration or for
                          inadequate consideration, then, section 27(i)
                          is not attracted. In such a case, the income
                          from house property will be included u/s
                          64(1A) in the hands of that parent, whose
                          total income before including minor child's
                          income is higher; and benefit of exemption
                          u/s 10(32) can be availed by that parent in
                          respect of the income so included if he/she
                          exercises the option of shifting out of the
                          default tax regime provided under section
                          115BAC(1A).

64(2)  Conversion of      Where an individual, who is a member of the
       self-acquired      HUF, converts his individual property into
       property into the  property of the HUF of which he is a member,
       property of a HUF  directly or indirectly, to the family otherwise

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.23
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

than for adequate consideration, the income
from such property shall continue to be
included in the total income of the individual.

Where the converted property has been
partitioned, either by way of total or partial
partition, the income derived from such
converted property as is received by the
spouse on partition shall also be included in
the total income of the individual who
effected the conversion of such property.

Note: As per Explanation 2 to section 64 `income' includes `loss'. Therefore,
clubbing provisions would be attracted in all the above cases, even if there is a
loss and not income.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.24  INCOME TAX LAW

                  TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

1. Mr. Sharma has four minor children - 2 daughters and 2 sons. The annual
       income of 2 daughters were ` 9,000 and ` 4,500 and of sons were
       ` 6,200 and ` 4,300, respectively. The daughter who has income of ` 4,500
       was suffering from a disability specified under section 80U.

       Compute the amount of income earned by minor children to be clubbed in
       hands of Mr. Sharma assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of
       the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).

2. During the previous year 2025-26, the following transactions occurred in
       respect of Mr. A.

       (a) Mr. A had a fixed deposit of ` 5,00,000 in Bank of India. He instructed
               the bank to credit the interest on the deposit @ 9% p.a. from 1-4-2025
               to 31-3-2026 to the savings bank account of Mr. B, son of his brother, to
               help him in his education.

       (b) Mr. A holds 75% profit share in a partnership firm. Mrs. A received a
              commission of ` 25,000 from the firm for promoting the sales of the
               firm. Mrs. A possesses no technical or professional qualification.

       (c) Mr. A gifted a flat to Mrs. A on April 1, 2025. During the previous year
               2025-26, Mrs. A's "Income from house property" (computed) was
               ` 52,000 from such flat.

       (d) Mr. A gifted ` 2,00,000 to his minor son who invested the same in a
               business and he derived income of ` 20,000 from the investment.

       (e) Mr. A's minor son derived an income of ` 20,000 through a business
               activity involving application of his skill and talent.

       During the year, Mr. A got a monthly pension of ` 10,000. He had no other
       income. Mrs. A received salary of ` 20,000 per month from a part time job.

       Examine the tax implications of each transaction and compute the total
       income of Mr. A, Mrs. A and their minor child assuming that they exercise the
       option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
       115BAC(1A).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.25
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

3. Mr. A has gifted a house property valued at ` 50 lakhs to his wife, Mrs. B, who
       in turn has gifted the same to Mrs. C, their daughter-in-law. The house was
       let out at ` 25,000 per month throughout the year. Compute the total income
       of Mr. A and Mrs. C.

Will your answer be different if the said property was gifted to his son,
husband of Mrs. C?

4. A proprietary business was started by Smt. Rani in the year 2023. As on
       1.4.2024 her capital in business was ` 3,00,000.

Her husband gifted ` 2,00,000 on 10.4.2024 to her and such sum is invested
by Smt. Rani in her business on the same date. Smt. Rani earned profits from
her proprietary business for the Financial Year 2024-25, ` 1,50,000 and
Financial Year 2025-26, ` 3,90,000. Compute the income, to be clubbed in the
hands of Rani's husband for the Assessment year 2026-27 with reasons.

5. Mr. B is the Karta of a HUF, whose members derive income as given below:

                                     Particulars              `
(i) Income from B' s profession                              45,000
(ii) Mrs. B' s salary as fashion designer                    76,000
(iii) Minor son D (interest on fixed deposits with a bank    10,000

        which were gifted to him by his uncle)               95,000
(iv) Minor daughter P's earnings from sports               1,95,000
(v) D's winnings from lottery (gross)

       Examine the tax implications in the hands of Mr. and Mrs. B.

6. Nishant gifted ` 10 lakhs to his wife, Nisha on her birthday on 1st January,
       2025. Nisha lent ` 5,00,000 out of the gifted amount to Krish on 1st April,
       2025 for six months on which she received interest of ` 50,000. The said sum
       of ` 50,000 was invested in shares of a listed company on 15th October, 2025,
       which were sold for ` 75,000 on 30th December, 2025. Securities transaction
       tax was paid on such sale. The balance amount of gift was invested as capital
       by Nisha in a newly business started on 1.4.2025. She suffered loss of ` 15,000
       in the business in Financial Year 2025-26.

       In whose hands the above income and loss shall be included in Assessment
       Year 2026-27? Support your answer with brief reasons.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.26  INCOME TAX LAW

7. Mrs. and Mr. Naresh Yadav have two minor children Mahi and Nonu. The
       following are the receipts in the hands of Mahi and Nonu during the year
       ended 31-3-2026:

       (i) Mahi received a gift of ` 85,000 from her friend's father on the occasion
               of her birthday.

       (ii) Nonu won a prize money of ` 3,00,000 in National Sports competition.

               This was invested in debentures of a company, from which interest of
              ` 25,000 (gross) accrued during the year.

       Mr. Naresh's income before considering clubbing provisions is higher than
       that of his wife and he has opted out of the default tax regime.

       Explain how these items will be considered for taxation under the provisions
       of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Detailed computation of income is not required.

8. Mr. Mahadev, a noted bhajan singer of Rajasthan and his wife Mrs. Dariya
       furnish the following information relating to the Assessment Year 2026-27.

                                                      `

1 Income of Mr. Mahadev-professional bhajan singer 5,65,000
      (computed)

2 Salary income of Mrs. Dariya (computed)             3,80,000

3 Loan received by Mrs. Dariya from Ramu & Jay (Pvt) 2,50,000
      Ltd. (Mrs. Dariya holds 35% shares of the Co. The Co.
      has incurred losses since its inception 2 years back)

4 Income of their minor son Golu from winning singing 2,50,000
      reality show on T.V.

5 Cash gift received by Golu from friend of           21,000
      Mr. Mahadev on winning the show

6 Interest income received by minor married daughter  40,000
      Gudia from deposit with Ramu & Jay Pvt Ltd.

Compute total taxable income of Mr. Mahadev & Mrs. Dariya for the
Assessment Year 2026-27 if both of them are paying tax under default tax
regime.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                                4.27
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

           ANSWERS

1. As per section 64(1A), in computing the total income of an individual, all
       such income accruing or arising to a minor child shall be included. However,
       income of a minor child suffering from disability specified under section
       80U would not be included in the income of the parent but would be
       taxable in the hands of the minor child. Therefore, in this case, the income
       of daughter suffering from disability specified under section 80U should not
       be clubbed with the income of Mr. Sharma.

Under section 10(32), income of each minor child includible in the hands of
the parent under section 64(1A) would be exempt to the extent of the actual
income or ` 1,500, whichever is lower. Mr. Sharma would be eligible for
exemption u/s 10(32) since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The remaining
income would be included in the hands of the parent.

Computation of income earned by minor children to be clubbed with
                               the income of Mr. Sharma

                                                   Particulars        `

(i) Income of one daughter                                            9,000

Less: Income exempt under section 10(32)                              1,500

Total (A)                                                             7,500

(ii) Income of two sons (` 6,200 + ` 4,300)                           10,500

Less: Income exempt under section 10(32)                              3,000
(` 1,500 + ` 1,500)

Total (B)                                                             7,500

Total Income to be clubbed as per section 64(1A)                      15,000
(A+B)

Note: It has been assumed that:

(1) The income does not accrue or arise to the minor children on account
       of any manual work done by them or activity involving application of
       their skill, talent or specialized knowledge and experience;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.28  INCOME TAX LAW

(2) The income of Mr. Sharma, before including the minor children's
       income, is greater than the income of Mrs. Sharma, due to which the
       income of the minor children would be included in his hands; and

(3) This is the first year in which clubbing provisions are attracted.

2. Computation of total income of Mr. A, Mrs. A and their minor son
                                       for the A.Y. 2026-27

            Particulars                            Mr. A             Mrs. A     Minor
                                                     (`)               (`)      Son (`)
Income under the head
"Salaries"                                                 - 2,40,000                    -
Salary income (of Mrs. A)
Pension income (of Mr. A)                                  1,20,000          -
(` 10,000×12)
Less: Standard deduction                                   50,000 50,000
under section 16(ia)                                       70,000 1,90,000

Income from House                                          52,000            -           -
Property [See Note (3)
below]                                             45,000                    -           -

Income from other sources                          25,000 70,000             -           -
Interest on Mr. A's fixed
deposit with Bank of India
(` 5,00,000×9%) [See Note
(1) below]

Commission received by
Mrs. A from a partnership
firm, in which Mr. A has
substantial interest [See
Note (2) below]

Income before including                                    1,92,000 1,90,000             -
income of minor son under
section 64(1A)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                           4.29
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

Income of the minor son                            18,500        -    -
from the investment made in
the business out of the                            -             -    20,000
amount gifted by Mr. A [See                                           20,000
Note (4) below]                                    2,10,500 1,90,000

Income of the minor son
through a business activity
involving application of his
skill and talent [See Note (5)
below]

Total Income

Notes:

(1) As per section 60, in case there is a transfer of income without transfer
       of asset from which such income is derived, such income shall be
       treated as income of the transferor. Therefore, the fixed deposit
       interest of ` 45,000 transferred by Mr. A to Mr. B shall be included in
       the total income of Mr. A.

(2) As per section 64(1)(ii), in case the spouse of the individual receives
       any amount by way of income from any concern in which the
       individual has substantial interest (i.e. holding shares carrying at least
       20% voting power or entitled to at least 20% of the profits of the
       concern), then, such income shall be included in the total income of
       the individual. The only exception is in a case where the spouse
       possesses any technical or professional qualifications and the income
       earned is solely attributable to the application of her technical or
       professional knowledge and experience, in which case, the clubbing
       provisions would not apply.

       In this case, the commission income of ` 25,000 received by Mrs. A
       from the partnership firm has to be included in the total income of
       Mr. A, as Mrs. A does not possess any technical or professional
       qualification for earning such commission and Mr. A has substantial
       interest in the partnership firm as he holds 75% profit share in the
       firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.30  INCOME TAX LAW

(3) According to section 27(i), an individual who transfers any house
       property to his or her spouse otherwise than for adequate
       consideration or in connection with an agreement to live apart, shall
       be deemed to be the owner of the house property so transferred.
       Hence, Mr. A shall be deemed to be the owner of the flat gifted to
       Mrs. A and hence, the income arising from the same shall be
       computed in the hands of Mr. A.

       Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the
       hands of Mrs. A, since she has received immovable property without
       consideration from a relative i.e., her husband.

(4) As per section 64(1A), the income of the minor child is to be included
       in the total income of the parent whose total income (excluding the
       income of minor child to be so clubbed) is greater. Further, as per
       section 10(32), income of a minor child which is includible in the
       income of the parent shall be exempt to the extent of ` 1,500 per
       child.

       Therefore, the income of ` 20,000 received by minor son from the
       investment made out of the sum gifted by Mr. A shall, after providing
       for exemption of ` 1,500 under section 10(32), be included in the
       income of Mr. A, since Mr. A's income of ` 1,92,000 (before including
       the income of the minor child) is greater than Mrs. A's income of
       ` 1,90,000. Therefore, ` 18,500 (i.e., ` 20,000 ­ ` 1,500) shall be
       included in Mr. A's income. It is assumed that this is the first year in
       which clubbing provisions are attracted.

       Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the
       hands of the minor son, since he has received a sum of money
       exceeding ` 50,000 without consideration from a relative i.e., his
       father.

(5) In case the income earned by the minor child is on account of any
       activity involving application of any skill or talent, then, such income
       of the minor child shall not be included in the income of the parent
       but shall be taxable in the hands of the minor child.

       Therefore, the income of ` 20,000 derived by Mr. A's minor son
       through a business activity involving application of his skill and talent

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.31
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

shall not be clubbed in the hands of the parent. Such income shall be
taxable in the hands of the minor son.

3. As per section 27(i), an individual who transfers otherwise than for adequate
       consideration any house property to his spouse, not being a transfer in
       connection with an agreement to live apart, shall be deemed to be the
       owner of the house property so transferred.

Therefore, in this case, Mr. A would be the deemed owner of the house
property transferred to his wife Mrs. B without consideration.

As per section 64(1)(vi), income arising to the son's wife from assets
transferred, directly or indirectly, to her by an individual otherwise than for
adequate consideration would be included in the total income of such
individual.

Income from let-out property is ` 2,10,000 [i.e., ` 3,00,000, being the actual
rent calculated at ` 25,000 per month less ` 90,000, being deduction under
section 24 @30% of ` 3,00,000]

In this case, income of ` 2,10,000 from let-out property arising to Mrs. C,
being Mr. A's son's wife, would be included in the income of Mr. A, applying
the provisions of section 27(i) and section 64(1)(vi). Such income would,
therefore, not be taxable in the hands of Mrs. C.

In case the property was gifted to Mr. A's son, the clubbing provisions under
section 64 would not apply, since the son is not a minor child. Therefore,
the income of ` 2,10,000 from letting out of property gifted to the son
would be taxable in the hands of the son.

It may be noted that the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be
attracted in the hands of the recipient of house property, since the receipt
of property in each case was from a "relative" of such individual. Therefore,
the stamp duty value of house property would not be chargeable to tax in
the hands of the recipient of immovable property, even though the house
property was received by her or him without consideration.

Note - The first part of the question can also be answered by applying the
provisions of section 64(1)(vi) directly to include the income of ` 2,10,000
arising to Mrs. C in the hands of Mr. A. [without first applying the provisions
of section 27(i) to deem Mr. A as the owner of the house property transferred

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.32         INCOME TAX LAW

to his wife Mrs. B without consideration], since section 64(1)(vi) speaks of
clubbing of income arising to son's wife from indirect transfer of assets to her
by her husband's parent, without consideration. Gift of house property by
Mr. A to Mrs. C, via Mrs. B, can be viewed as an indirect transfer by Mr. A to
Mrs. C.

4. Section 64(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for the clubbing of
       income in the hands of the individual, if the income earned is from the
       assets transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse of the individual,
       otherwise than for adequate consideration. In this case Smt. Rani received a
       gift of ` 2,00,000 from her husband which she invested in her business. The
       income to be clubbed in the hands of Smt. Rani's husband for A.Y.2026-27
       is computed as under:

Particulars                                         Smt. Rani's      Capital
                                                       Capital   Contribution
                                                                               Total
                                                   Contribution   Out of gift
                                                                      from        `
                                                           `                   3,00,000
                                                                    husband    2,00,000
                                                                               5,00,000
                                                                         `
                                                                               1,50,000
Capital as at 1.4.2024                             3,00,000                 -  6,50,000
Investment on 10.04.2024                           3,00,000      2,00,000
out of gift received from her                                    2,00,000      3,90,000
husband                                            1,50,000
                                                   4,50,000      2,00,000
Profit for F.Y. 2024-25 to be                      2,70,000      1,20,000
apportioned on the basis of
capital employed on the first
day of the previous year i.e.,
on 1.4.2024
Capital employed as at
1.4.2025
Profit for F.Y.2025-26 to be
apportioned on the basis of
capital employed as at
1.4.2025 (i.e., 45 : 20)

Therefore, the income to be clubbed in the hands of Smt. Rani's husband for
A.Y.2026-27 is ` 1,20,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.33
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

5. Clubbing of income and other tax implications

As per the provisions of section 64(1A), in case the marriage of the parents
subsist, the income of a minor child shall be clubbed in the hands of the
parent whose total income, excluding the income of the minor child to be
clubbed, is greater. In this problem, it has been assumed that the marriage
of Mr. B and Mrs. B subsists.

Further, in case the income arises to the minor child on account of any
manual work done by the child or as a result of any activity involving
application of skill, talent, specialized knowledge or experience of the child,
then, the same shall not be clubbed in the hands of the parent.

Tax implications

(i) Income of ` 45,000 from Mr. B's profession shall be taxable in the
       hands of Mr. B under the head "Profits and gains of business or
       profession".

(ii) Salary of ` 1,000 (` 76,000 less standard deduction under section
       16(ia) of ` 75,000) shall be taxable as "Salaries" in the hands of Mrs. B.

However, if Mrs. B exercises the option of shifting out of default tax
regime, salary of ` 26,000 (` 76,000 less standard deduction under
section 16(ia) of ` 50,000) shall be taxable as "Salaries".

(iii) Income from fixed deposit of ` 10,000 arising to the minor son D, shall
       be clubbed in the hands of the father, Mr. B as "Income from other
       sources", since Mr. B's income is greater than income of Mrs. B before
       including the income of the minor child.

As per section 10(32), income of a minor child which is includible in
the income of the parent shall be exempt to the extent of ` 1,500 per
child if such parent exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The balance income
would be clubbed in the hands of the parent as "Income from other
sources".

(iv) Income of ` 95,000 arising to the minor daughter P from sports shall
       not be included in the hands of the parent, since such income has
       arisen to the minor daughter on account of an activity involving
       application of her skill.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.34  INCOME TAX LAW

       (v) Income of ` 1,95,000 arising to minor son D from lottery shall be
               included in the hands of Mr. B as "Income from other sources", since
               Mr. B's income is greater than the income of Mrs. B before including
               the income of minor child.

               Note ­ Mr. B can reduce the tax deducted at source from such lottery
               income while computing his net tax liability.

6. As per section 64(1)(iv), in computing the total income of any individual,
       there shall be included all such income as arises directly or indirectly to the
       spouse of such individual from assets transferred directly or indirectly to the
       spouse by such individual otherwise than for adequate consideration or in
       connection with an agreement to live apart.

       Accordingly, ` 50,000, being the amount of interest on loan received by
       Ms. Nisha, wife of Mr. Nishant, would be includible in the total income of
       Mr. Nishant, since such loan was given by her out of the sum of money
       received by her as gift from her husband.

       Since the capital was invested in business by Ms. Nisha on 1st April, 2025,
       and capital invested was entirely out of the funds gifted by her husband, the
       entire loss of ` 15,000 from the business carried on by Ms. Nisha would also
       be includible in the total income of Mr. Nishant.

       Since income includes loss as per Explanation 2 to section 64, clubbing
       provisions would be attracted even if there is loss and not income.

       The short-term capital gain of ` 25,000 (` 75,000, being the sale
       consideration less ` 50,000, being the cost of acquisition) arising in the
       hands of Ms. Nisha from sale of shares acquired by investing the interest
       income of ` 50,000 earned by her (from the loan given out of the sum gifted
       to her by her husband), would not be included in the hands of Mr. Nishant.

       Income from the accretion of the transferred asset is not liable to be
       included in the hands of the transferor and therefore such income is taxable
       in the hands of Ms. Nisha. Since securities transaction tax has been paid,
       such short-term capital gain on sale of listed shares is taxable@20% in the
       hands of Ms. Nisha.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED                   4.35
              IN ASSESSEE'S TOTAL INCOME

7. (i) Gift received from non-relative by minor daughter Mahi

Gift of ` 85,000 received by minor daughter Mahi, from non-relative
would be taxable, since the amount of gift exceeds ` 50,000. It would
be included in the hands of her father, Mr. Naresh Yadav, since his
income before considering clubbing provisions is higher than that of
his wife.

Exemption of ` 1,500 would be allowed in respect of the aggregate
income of minor daughter Mahi so included in the hands of
Mr. Naresh Yadav under section 10(32)

(ii) Prize money of ` 3,00,000 in National Sports Competition/Interest
       on debentures received by minor son Nonu

Income derived by a minor child from any activity involving
application of his/her skill, talent, specialised knowledge and
experience is not to be included in the hands of parent. Hence, the
prize money of ` 3,00,000 won in National Sports Competition by
minor son Nonu from exercise of special talent would not be included
in the income of either parent.

However, interest of ` 25,000 on debentures has to be included in the
hands of her father, Mr. Naresh Yadav, even if the investment is made
out of income arising from application of special talent.

Exemption of ` 1,500 would be allowed in respect of the aggregate
income of minor son Nonu so included in the hands of Mr. Naresh
Yadav under section 10(32).

8. Computation of Taxable income of Mr. Mahadev for A.Y. 2026-27

                                  Particulars                       `
                                                                5,65,000
Professional income (bhajan singer)
                                                                       Nil
Income of minor son ­ Golu

- Income from winning singing reality show on T.V.
   Income derived by a minor child from any activity
   involving application of his/her skill, talent, specialized
   knowledge and experience is not to be included in the
   hands of parent. Hence, ` 2,50,000 earned by minor son
   Golu from reality show on TV would not be included in the
   income of either parent.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.36                      INCOME TAX LAW

- Cash gift received by Golu from friend of Mr. Mahadev on        Nil

winning the show

The cash gift received by his minor son Golu (not on
account of her skill) from his friends would not be taxable,
since its value does not exceed ` 50,000.

Income of minor married daughter ­ Gudia

Interest income on deposit with Ramu & Jay Pvt Ltd. 40,000

Less: Exemption under section 10(32) [Not allowable]  Nil 40,000

[Income of minor daughter would be included in the hands of
Mr. Mahadev, since his income, before including minor
daughter's income, is higher than his wife's income.]

Taxable Income                                                 6,05,000

Computation of Taxable income of Mrs. Dariya for A.Y. 2026-27

                  Particulars                                  `

Salary income (computed)                                       3,80,000

Loan received from Ramu & Jay (Pvt) Ltd.                          Nil

[Such loan amount would not be considered as deemed
dividend under section 2(22)(e), even though Mrs. Dariya has
substantial interest (holding 20% shares or more) in the Ramu
& Jay (Pvt) Ltd., a closely held company, since the company
does not have any accumulated profits on account of losses
incurred in last 2 years from inception]

Taxable Income                                                 3,80,000

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
