CHAPTER  2

INCORPORATION OF

COMPANY     AND

MATTERS

INCIDENTAL THERETO

                                        LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:

 Explain the Formation & Incorporation of company (Private
      Limited/ Public Limited), One person company (OPC) and the
      formation of Not for Profit Organization (Section 8
      Company).

 Identify the need for Memorandum of Association (MOA) and
      Articles of Association (AOA) and changes incidental thereto.

 Know the effect of registration.

 Explain and identify the concepts related to registered office
      of company.

 Understand how documents may be served and filing thereof.

 Know about Authentication of documents, proceedings and
      contracts and Execution of bills of exchange, etc.
2.2               CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

This chapter will discuss in detail the provisions contained in Chapter II of the
Companies Act 2013 pertaining to the incorporation of companies and matters
incidental thereto. The scope of this chapter is shown in below figure:

                   Incorporation of company and related matters

Formation and     Memorandum        Documents           Other
Incorporation      and Articles                       Provisions

   Minimum        Memorandum        Service (Sec 20)   Commencement
  members &       (MOA) (Sec 4)                           of Business
                                                           (Sec 10A)
       OPC        Article (AOA)     Authentication
  (Sec 3 & 3A)         (Sec 5)          (Sec 21)      Registered Office
                                                            (Sec 12)
  Documents       Act to override   Execution
required for inc    MOA/AOA          (Sec 22)          Rectify Name
                       (Sec 6)                             (Sec 16)
     (Sec 7)
                   Alteration in                           Convert
 Not for profit   Memorandum                             Company
company (Sec                                               (Sec 18)
                      (Sec 13)
         8)                                              Subsidiary
                                                         Can't hold
    Effect of                                             shares in
  registration
                                                           holding
      (Sec 9)                                              (Sec 19)

                   Alteration in
                  Article (Sec 14)

                  Updation of changes to be
                     noted in every copy of
                       MOA/AOA (Sec 15)

                  Give copy of MOA/AOA to
                       members (Sec 17)
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                       2.3

            INCIDENTAL THERETO

1. INTRODUCTION TO INCORPORATION OF
      COMPANIES & PROMOTOR

Chapter II  Consists of sections 3 to 22 as well as the Companies
            (Incorporation) Rules, 2014.

A company is a separate legal entity from its members. It has perpetual succession
and can be incorporated only for lawful purposes. Prior to incorporation, promotion
activities are essential. Promotion signifies a number of business operations familiar
to the commercial world by which a company is brought into existence.1

Persons who undertake promotion activities in order to incorporate the company
are generally known as promoters. The section 2(69) of Companies Act, 2013
(herein after referred to as `the Act') defines the term "Promoter" (already
mentioned in chapter 1 of module; elaborated here). Promoter means a person:

a. Who has been named as promoter in a prospectus; or

b. Who is identified as promoter by the company in the annual return; or

c. Who has control over the affairs of the company, directly or indirectly whether
       as a shareholder, director or otherwise; or

d. In accordance with whose advice, directions or instructions the Board of
       Directors of the company is accustomed to act, but shall not include a
       person who is acting merely in a professional capacity such as attorney,
       technical or functional experts.

Students are advised to take note that above definition serves the purpose to make
a person liable `in capacity of promoter' for fraud through misstatement, but not
highlighting what actually promoters do. Hence, considering the judicial
pronouncements improves our understanding regarding role of promoter.

Promoter is one who undertakes to form a company with reference to a given
project, and to set it going, and who takes the necessary steps to accomplish that

1 Whaley Bridge Printing Co. v. Green (1880) 5 B.D. 109
2.4  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

purpose.2 To be a promoter, one need not necessarily be associated with the initial
formation of the company; one who subsequently helps to arrange floating of its
capital will equally be regarded as a promoter.3

Hence, "promoter" denotes any individual, association, partnership or a company
that takes all the necessary steps to incorporate (create and mould)4 a company
and set it going, in a fiduciary position.5

Illustration (True/False)

Statement ­ To be a promoter one necessarily be associated with the initial formation
of the company.

Answer - False, one who subsequently helps company to keep going, raise fund &
advice to board (other than in professional capacity) will equally be regarded as a
promoter.

    2. FORMATION OF COMPANY [SECTION 3]

In the pre independence era, companies were granted rights by royal charter, but
now a company is incorporated by either a special Act of the legislature or under
the Companies Act, 2013. Accordingly, an incorporated company may be either
Chartered Company, Statutory Company, or Registered Company. Section 3 of the
Act deals with registered companies.

FORMS OF COMPANIES

The Companies are broadly classified into categories shown below in figure.
Definitions of many of these are already covered under chapter 1 of this module.

2 Twycross v. Grant (1877) 2 C.P.D. 469
3 Lagunas Nitrate Co. v. Lagunas Syndicate (1899) 2 Ch. 392.
4 Erlanger v New Sombrero Phosphate Co. (1878) 48 LJ Ch. 73
5 ibid
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                                     2.5

                   INCIDENTAL THERETO

Kind of Companies

                                                         Company

                                 Incorporated Companies                Un-incorporated

                                 On the basis of mode of registration

                   Registered                 Statutory  Chartered
                   Companies                 Companies   Companies

                   On the basis of liabilty

Limited by Shares  Limited by Guarantee                                Unlimited

Public Private     with capital  without capital         with capital  without capital

                   Public Private Public Private Public Private Public Private

Sub-section 1 to section 3 provides that for lawful purpose, by subscribing their
name to memorandum and complying with requirement of this Act:
a. A public company may be formed by seven (7) or more persons
b. A private company may be formed by two (2) or more persons
c. A one person company (as private company) may be formed by one (1)

       person.
Further, sub-section 2 to section 3 provides that, company formed as specified
above may be incorporated either as:

a. Companies limited by shares; or

b. Companies limited by guarantee; or
c. Unlimited liability companies.
2.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Note: A limited liability companies may be companies limited by guarantee as well
as shares.

Specified IFSC Public or Specified IFSC Private Company shall be formed only as a
company limited by shares. IFSC Company means a company licensed to set up
businesses in any International Financial Services Center in India, example in Gujarat
International Finance Tec-City.

ONE PERSON COMPANY (OPC)

The Companies Act, 2013 for the first time allowed the formation of company by
just one person with limited liability, called one person company; such a company
is described as a private company under section 3(1)(c). Further section 3(1) along
with rule 3 and 4 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014, provides certain
provisions specifically applicable in case of One Person Company listed below.

Who can form one person company?

Only a natural person, other than minor; who is an Indian citizen and whether
resident in India or otherwise shall be eligible to incorporate a One Person
Company.

Resident in India means a person who has stayed in India for a period of not less
than 120 days during the immediately preceding financial year.

OPC can't be incorporated or converted into a company under section 8 of the Act.
Further, OPC can't carry out Non-Banking Financial Investment activities including
investment in securities of any body-corporates.

Indicate Name & Consent Nominee

The memorandum of One Person Company shall also indicate the name of the
natural person, other than minor; who is an Indian citizen, whether resident in India
or otherwise (as nominee), along with his prior written consent in requisite form,
who shall, in the event of the subscriber's death or his incapacity to contract
become the member of the company.

Note: This provision is to ensure perpetual succession of legal existence of OPC.

Example ­ Ms. Madhu formed an OPC wherein Mr. Sudan is nominee as his name
is specified in MOA along with his consent. Ms. Madhu declared insolvent, pending
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS  2.7

INCIDENTAL THERETO

to discharge insolvency, she becomes incompetent to contract, hence, Mr. Sudan
becomes the member of such OPC.

The name of such nominated person in Form No. INC-32 (SPICe) along with consent
of such nominee obtained in Form No. INC-4 and fee as provided in the Companies
(Registration offices and fees) Rules, 2014 shall be filed with the Registrar at the
time of incorporation of the company along with its memorandum and articles.

Note: A natural person shall not be member of more than a One Person Company
at any point of time and the said person shall not be a nominee of more than a
One Person Company. [Sub rule 2 of Rule 3]

Where a natural person, being member in One Person Company in accordance with
this rule [Rule 3(2)] becomes a member in another such Company by virtue of his
being a nominee in that One Person Company, such person shall meet the above
specified criteria (can be member of only one OPC) within a period of 180 days.

Withdraw of Consent by Nominee

Such other person (nominee) may withdraw his consent by giving a notice in
writing to such sole member and to the One Person Company.

In this case, the sole member shall nominate another person as nominee within 15
days of the receipt of the notice of withdrawal and shall send an intimation of such
nomination in writing to the company, along with the written consent of such other
person so nominated in form of a declaration in Form No. INC- 4.

Note: Despite name of such other (old nominee) and another person (new
nominee) specified in memorandum, any such change in the name of the person
shall not be deemed to be an alteration of the memorandum.

Replacing Nominee with another one

The member may change the name of the person nominated by him at any time
for any reason including in case of death or incapacity to contract of nominee and
nominate another person (new nominee) after obtaining the prior consent of such
another person.

Member can do so by giving intimation in writing to the company.
2.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

This is not specified, either in Act or rules whether intimation shall be prior to
making change or can be made afterward, but if we consider reasonable
construction the intimation shall be `Prior Intimation'.

Any such change in the name of the person shall not be deemed to be an alteration
of the memorandum.

Example - Rajesh has formed a `One Person Company (OPC), wherein his wife
Roopali is named as nominee. For the last two years, his wife Roopali is suffering
from terminal illness and due to this hard fact he wants to change her as nominee.
He has a trusted and experienced friend Ramnivas who could be made nominee or
his (Rajesh) son Rakshak who is of seventeen years of age. In the instant case, Rajesh
can appoint his friend Ramnivas as nominee in his OPC and not Rakshak because
Rakshak is a minor.

When Nominee become Member

Where the sole member ceases to be the member and nominee become new
member, then such new member shall nominate within fifteen days of becoming
member, a person (new nominee) who shall in the event of his death or his
incapacity to contract become the member of such company.

Notice of change to Registrar

In all the three case of change discussed above (Withdraw of Consent by Nominee,
Replacing Nominee with another one and When Nominee become Member) the
company within 30 days of receipt of notice of withdrawal of consent by nominee,
intimation of change of nominee from member, or cessation; shall file the notice
with the Registrar of such withdrawal of consent, change or cessation respectively
and intimate the name of such another person (new nominee) in Form No. INC-4
along with the fee as provided in the Companies (Registration offices and fees)
Rules, 2014 and the written consent of such another person so nominated in form
of a declaration in Form No. INC-4 .

Illustration (True/False)

Statement ­ Even a Non-Resident Indian can form and become member of OPC.

Answer ­ True. [As per Rule 3(1) of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014.]

Only a natural person, other than minor; who is an Indian citizen and whether
resident in India or otherwise shall be eligible to incorporate a One Person
Company.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS  2.9

INCIDENTAL THERETO

Additional reading

Relaxations available to an OPC include:

 Not required to prepare a cash-flow statement with effect of section 2(40).

 The annual return to be furnished under section 92 can be signed by the
       Director and not necessarily a Company Secretary. Even abridged annual
       return may be prescribed.

 Further, following the similar line, section 134 provides it would suffice if one
       director signs the audited financial statements and abridged form of director
       report may be prescribed.

 Holding annual general meeting as required under section 96 is not necessary
       in case of OPC. Moreover, certain specific provisions related to general
       meetings and extraordinary general meetings, specified under sections 100
       to 111 may not be applicable to OPC.

 Even relaxation is also there in convening board meetings. Section 1736
       requires an OPC to hold only one meeting of the Board of Directors in each
       half of a calendar year.

 Vide section 137, the OPC are allowed to file financial statements within six
       months from the close of the financial year as against 30 days.

    3. MEMBERS SEVERALLY LIABLE IN CERTAIN
          CASES i.e. REDUCTION IN MINIMUM
          MEMBERSHIP [SECTION 3A]

Member may have limited or unlimited liability depending upon nature of
company. Generally, the members are jointly liable for the debt of company, but
they shall be severally liable for the payment of the debts of the company and may
be severally sued therefor; if at any time:

1. The number of members of a company is reduced below seven (7) and two
       (2) in case of a public and private company, respectively; and

6 Section 173 of the Companies Act, 2013, does not form part of syllabus at Intermediate level
and has been given for reference purpose only and necessary to build understanding.
2.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

2. Such company carries on business for more than six months with reduced
       number of members;

3. Every such person who carries on business after those six months is
       cognizant (aware) of the fact that business is carried with reduced members,

Such members are liable for the payment of the whole debts of the company
contracted during that time (after elapse of six months).

Example ­ Amar, Akbar, and Anthony along with five of their friends were member
of Harmony Limited. Amar and Akbar died on 18th August 2022, resultantly
members count reduced to 6 and everyone was aware about it. Harmony Limited
continued its operation without increasing members. In March 2023, company took
loan for business operations, and defaulted in payment thereof. The lender of such
loan can sue company, or Anthony or any of rest of five friends, because members
shall be severally liable for said loan in the given case.

Illustration (True/False)

Statement ­ Members who knowingly operating the company for more than six months
with less than the minimum number of members specified in Section 3(1) are severally
liable for the payment of all debts contracted by the company during the period since
the number of members was first reduced.

Answer ­ False, refer section 3A of the Act. Such members are liable severally for the
payment of the whole debts of the company contracted during that time (after elapse
of six months).

    4. INCORPORATION OF COMPANY [SECTION 7]

Section 7 of the Act provides for the procedure to be followed for incorporation of
a company. The steps involved in the process of incorporation are enumerated in
Figure shown below (Steps for Incorporation). Majority of steps are covered under
section 7 while some other related to documents such as MOA and AOA governed
by section 4 and 5 respectively. Corresponding procedural aspects are described
by rule 12 to 18 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014 and Fees are notified
through rule 12 of the Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                                  2.11
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO
                                                     3. Drafting and
Steps for Incorporation    2. Reservation of        signing of MOA &
                           name by filing an
      1. Determine the                                       AOA
     nature of company         apllication
      (private or public)

6. Submission of              5. Consent of         4. Submission of
     statutory             persons nominated        MOA and AOA to

  declaration of                as directors                ROC
   compliances

  7. Pay fees &            8. Obtain certificate    9. File declaration
amount of stamp              of incorporation       about address of
                                                    Registered office
        duty

Note: Now, it is also required to submit a declaration that all the subscribers have
paid the value of shares agreed to be taken by him apart from filling of verification
of registered office before the commencement of business.

FILING OF THE DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION WITH THE REGISTRAR
[SUB-SECTION 1]

An application for registration of a company shall be filed, with the Registrar within
whose jurisdiction the registered office of the company is proposed to be situated,
in SPICe+(Simplified Proforma for Incorporating company Electronically Plus: INC-
32) along with the fee as provided under the Companies (Registration offices and
fees) Rules, 2014 accompanied by following documents and information;

SPICe+ is an integrated Web form offering 10 services by 3 Central Govt. Ministries
& Departments. (Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Labour & Department of
Revenue in the Ministry of Finance) thereby saving as many procedures, time and
cost for starting a business in India. SPICe+ is initiatives towards Ease of Doing
Business. Students may refer to FAQs on SPICe+ form at MCAs' website for more
details https://www.mca.gov.in/MinistryV2/spicefaq.html
2.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

The duly signed memorandum of association and articles of association

The memorandum (e-MOA in Form No. INC-33) and article (e-AOA in Form No.
INC-34) of company so furnished shall be duly signed by all the subscribers to the
memorandum in the manner prescribed by rule 13 of the Companies (Incorporation)
Rules, 2014 as stated below:

a. Each subscriber shall add his name, address, description & occupation, if
       any, in the presence of at least one witness who shall attest the signature,
       shall sign and add his name, address, description and occupation, if any.

b. Where a subscriber is illiterate, he shall affix his thumb impression or mark
       which shall be described as such by the person, writing for him, who shall
       place the name of the subscriber against or below the mark and authenticate
       it by his own signature and he shall also write against the name of the
       subscriber, the number of shares taken by him.

        Note: The type written or printed particulars of the subscribers and witnesses
        shall be allowed as if it is written, so long as appends signature or thumb
        impression.

c. Where the subscriber is a body corporate, the memorandum and articles of
       association shall be signed by director, officer or employee of the body
       corporate duly authorized in this behalf by a resolution of the board of
       directors.

d. Where the subscriber is a Limited Liability Partnership, it shall be signed by
       a partner of the Limited Liability Partnership, duly authorized by a resolution
       approved by all the partners of the Limited Liability Partnership:

        Note: In either case c or d stated above, the person so authorized shall not,
        at the same time, be a subscriber to the memorandum and articles of
        Association.

e. Where subscriber to the memorandum is a foreign national residing outside
       India his signatures and address on the memorandum and articles of
       association and proof of identity shall be notarized by a Notary (Public)
       with a certificate. Further, if such person residing in a country outside the
       Commonwealth or which is not a party to the Hague Apostille Convention,
       1961, the certificate of the Notary (Public) shall be authenticated by a
       Diplomatic or Consular Officer.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.13
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

f. Where subscriber to the memorandum is a foreign national residing outside
       India and visited in India and intended to incorporate a company, in such case
       the incorporation shall be allowed if, he/she is having a valid Business Visa.
       In case of Person is of Indian Origin or Overseas Citizen of India, requirement
       of business Visa shall not be applicable.

Practical Insight / Illustration

Extracts from Memorandum of Association of XYZ Limited (Corporate
Identification Number: L85XXXKA1981PLC01XX15)
2.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Declaration of Compliance by Professional & Director, Manager or Secretary
of company

A declaration that all the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder
in respect of registration and matters precedent or incidental thereto have been
complied with shall be be filled in Form No. INC-8 by:

a. an advocate, a chartered accountant, cost accountant or company secretary
       in practice who is engaged in the formation of the company and

b. a person named in the articles as director, manager or secretary of the
       company.

Declaration by subscribers to the memorandum and persons named as the
first directors

A declaration in Form No. INC-9 from each of the subscribers to the memorandum
and from persons named as the first directors (if any) in the articles, stating that all
the documents filed with the Registrar for registration of the company contain
information that is correct and complete and true to the best of his knowledge
and belief

a. He is not convicted of any offence in connection with the promotion,
       formation or management of any company, or

b. He has not been found guilty of any fraud or misfeasance or of any breach
       of duty to any company under this Act or any previous company law during
       the last five years,

Address for correspondence

The address for correspondence till its registered office is established.

Particulars of persons named as the first directors

The particulars i.e name, including surname or family name, the Director
Identification Number (DIN), residential address, nationality and such other
particulars including proof of identity of each person mentioned in the articles as
first director of the company and his interest in other firms or bodies corporate
along with his consent (Form No. DIR-2) to act as director of the company shall be
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.15
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

filed in Form No. DIR-12 along with the fee as provided in the Companies
(Registration offices and fees) Rules, 2014.

Particulars of subscribers to the memorandum

The following particulars of every subscriber to the memorandum shall be filled;

a. Name (including surname or family name) and recent Photograph affixed

b. Father's/Mother's name

c. Nationality, Proof of nationality in case the subscriber is a foreign national

d. Date and Place of Birth (District and State)

e. Educational qualification and Occupation

f. Permanent Account Number

g. Email id and Phone number of Subscriber

h. Permanent residential address and also Present address

i. Residential proof such as Bank Statement, Electricity Bill, Telephone / Mobile
       Bill, provided that Bank statement Electricity bill, Telephone or Mobile bill
       shall not be more than two months old

j. Proof of Identity (For Indian Nationals - Voter's identity card, Passport copy,
       Driving License copy, Unique Identification Number (UIN) & for Foreign
       nationals and Non Resident Indians ­ Passport)

k. If the subscriber is already a director or promoter of a company(s), the
       particulars relating to name of the company; Corporate Identity Number;
       Whether interested as a director or promoter

Where the subscriber to the memorandum is a body corporate, then the following
particulars shall be filed with the Registrar

a. The name of the body corporate and Corporate Identity Number of the
       Company or Registration number of the body corporate, if any

b. GLN, if any
2.16  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

c. The registered office address or principal place of business

d. E-mail Id

e. If the body corporate is a company, certified true copy of the board resolution
       specifying inter-alia the authorization to subscribe to the MOA

f. If the body corporate is a limited liability partnership or partnership firm,
       certified true copy of the resolution agreed to by all the partners specifying
       inter alia the authorization to subscribe to the MOA

g. In case of foreign bodies corporate, the details relating to the copy of
       certificate of incorporation of the foreign body corporate; & the registered
       office address.

As per rule 12 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014

In case any of the objects of a company requires registration or approval from
sectoral regulators such as the RBI and SEBI, then such registration or approval shall
be obtained by the proposed company before pursuing such objects and a
declaration in this behalf shall be submitted at the stage of incorporation.

In case of a Company being incorporated as a Nidhi, the declaration by the Central
Government under Section 406 of the Act shall be obtained by the Nidhi before
commencing the business and a declaration in this behalf shall be submitted at the
stage of incorporation by the Company.

ISSUE OF CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION ON REGISTRATION

The Registrar on the basis of documents and information filed, shall register all the
documents and information in the register and issue a certificate of incorporation in
the Form No. INC-11 to the effect that the proposed company is incorporated under
this Act. Certificate of Incorporation shall mention permanent account number of the
company where if it is issued by the Income-tax Department.
      INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.17
                                      INCIDENTAL THERETO

Practical Insight
Certificate of Incorporation

Students are advised to take note;

The Certificate contains the name of the company, the date of its issue, CIN
(Corporate Identity Number) and the signature of the Registrar with his seal.

Certificate of incorporation is evidence of registration (existence of separate legal
entity with perpetual succession). It effects are highlighted by section 9, explain
later in this chapter.

Earlier, the certificate of incorporation considered as conclusive proof, but as per
the Companies Act, 2013, certificate of Incorporation is not conclusive proof of
everything prior to incorporation being in order. Sub-section (6) and (7) of
section 7 signify this understanding.
2.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

ALLOTMENT OF CORPORATE IDENTITY NUMBER (CIN)

On and from the date mentioned in the certificate of incorporation, the Registrar
shall allot to the company a corporate identity number, which shall be a distinct
identity for the company and which shall also be included in the certificate of
incorporation.

CIN is a 21 alpha-numeric digit based unique identification number, comprising
data sections/elements that reveals the basis aspects about company.

7Example - Decode the CIN

CIN of Infosys Limited is L85110KA1981PLC013115

The first character ­ L (reveals listing status, L for listed and U for unlisted, for
instance Infosys is Listed one)

The next five digits ­ 85110

The next two letters ­ KA (reveals the Indian state where the company is registered,
for instance KA is for Karnataka)

The next four digits ­ 1981 (reveals the year of incorporation of a company)

The next three characters ­ PLC (reveals the company classification - PLC for public,
PTC for private, FTC for foreign, and GOI for government)

The last six digits ­ 013115 (reveals registration number with concerned ROC)

MAINTENANCE OF COPIES OF ALL DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION

The company shall maintain and preserve copies of all the documents and
information as originally filed at its registered office, till its dissolution under this
Act.

FURNISHING OF FALSE OR INCORRECT INFORMATION OR SUPPRESSION
OF MATERIAL FACT AT THE TIME OF INCORPORATION (I.E. DURING
INCORPORATION PROCESS)

If any person furnishes any false or incorrect particulars of any information or
suppresses any material information, of which he is aware in any of the documents
filed with the Registrar in relation to the registration of a company, he shall be
liable for action for fraud under section 447.

7 This Example is only for understanding of the students.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.19
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Note: Provisions of section 447 explained in detail in book chapter 3; Prospectus
and Allotment of securities.

COMPANY ALREADY INCORPORATED BY FURNISHING ANY FALSE OR
INCORRECT INFORMATION OR REPRESENTATION OR BY SUPPRESSING ANY
MATERIAL FACT (i.e. POST INCORPORATION)

Where, at any time after the incorporation of a company, it is proved that the company
has been got incorporated by

a. furnishing any false or incorrect information or representation or

b. by suppressing any material fact or information in any of the documents or
       declaration filed or made for incorporating such company, or

c. by any fraudulent action,

Then, the promoters, the persons named as the first directors of the company and the
persons making declaration under this section shall each be liable for action for fraud
under section 447.

ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL

Where a company has been got incorporated by

a. furnishing false or incorrect information or representation, or

b. by suppressing any material fact or information in any of the documents or
       declaration filed or made for incorporating such company or

c. by any fraudulent action,

Then, the tribunal (NCLT) on being satisfied that the situation so warrants, in
response to an application made to it, may pass order as it may deem fit including;

a. regulation of the management of the company including changes, if any, in
       its memorandum and articles, in public interest or in the interest of the
       company and its members and creditors; or

b. direct that liability of the members shall be unlimited; or

c. direct removal of the name of the company from the register of companies; or

d. winding up of the company; or
2.20                                  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Provided that before making any such order:

a. the company shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
       matter; and

b. the Tribunal shall take into consideration the transactions entered into by the
       company, including the obligations, if any, contracted or payment of any
       liability

Tribunal means the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) constituted on 1st June,
2016 under section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013. The NCLT is a quasi- judicial
body in India that adjudicates issues relating to companies in India.

Example - The Certificate of incorporation is not the conclusive proof with respect
to the legality of the objects of the company mentioned in the objects clause of
the memorandum of association. As such, if a company has been registered whose
objects are illegal, the incorporation does not validate the illegal objects. In such a
case, the only remedy available is to wind up the company.

    5. FORMATION OF COMPANIES WITH
          CHARITABLE OBJECTS, ETC. [SECTION 8]

The underlying purpose of formation of company is not always making profit
through operating economic activities, it may have charitable or social objects.

To illustrate, Prem Foundation (CIN U85191MH2014NPL253514) and Azim Lalji
Foundation (CIN U93980KA2001NPL028740). Students are advised to take note
that 5th data section of both the CIN comprises of `NPL', which signify Not-for-Profit
License Company.

Such companies are licensed by Central Government* under section 8 of the
Companies Act, 2013, relevant provisions of section 8 and applicable rules thereto
are described below.

Note: The power of *Central Government under section 8 delegated to:
(i) ROCs8 to the extent and for purpose of:

        sub-section (1);

8 S.O. 1353(E), dated 21st May, 2014
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.21
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

        clause (i) to sub-section (4), except for alteration of memorandum in
               case of conversion into another kind of company; and

        sub-section (5)
(ii) Regional Directors9 to the extent and for purpose of:

        clause (i) to sub-section (4), for alteration of memorandum in case of
               conversion into another kind of company; and

        sub-section (6)

WHO CAN ISSUE AND GET THE LICENSE UNDER SECTION 8(1)?

As per section 8, the Central Government (ROC in its behalf) may grant such a
licence if it is proved to the satisfaction that a person or an association of persons
proposed to be registered under this Act as a limited company

a. has in its objects the promotion of commerce, art, science, sports, education,
       research, social welfare, religion, charity, protection of environment or any
       such other object;

b. intends to apply its profits (if any) or other income in promoting its objects;
       and

c. intends to prohibit payment of any dividend to its members.

Note: The use of the word `person' appears to allow even a single person to form
a company for the objects specified. However, as discussed earlier also (under
heading `OPC' of this chapter) that rule 3(5) of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules,
2014 prohibit the OPC to be incorporated or converted into a company under
section 8. Likewise, as per section 2(85), a small company cannot be incorporated
or converted into a section 8 company. A firm may be a member of the company
registered under section 8.

Despite, members liability is limited, the words `Limited' or `Private Limited' shall
not be added to its name. But on registration, the company shall enjoy same
privileges and obligations as of a limited company.

Licence issued may on such conditions as Central Government (ROC) deems fit.

9 S.O. 4090(E), dated 19th December 2016.
2.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

REGISTRATION OF COMPANY USING LICENSE

After granting licence, an application shall be made to registrar under section 8(1)
itself for registration of company in the manner specified in rule 19 of the
Companies (Incorporation) Rules 2014.

Application for registration

A person or an association of persons desirous of incorporating a company with
limited liability under section 8(1), shall make an application to registrar in Form
SPICe+ (Simplified Proforma for Incorporating company Electronically Plus: INC-
32) along with the fee as provided in the Companies (Registration offices and fees)
Rules, 2014.

Supporting document along with Application

The application furnished as specified above shall be accompanied by the following
documents:

a. The memorandum and articles of association of the proposed company;

b. the declaration by an Advocate, a Chartered Accountant, Cost Accountant or
       Company Secretary in practice, that the memorandum and articles of
       association have been drawn up in conformity with the provisions of section
       8 and rules made thereunder and that all the requirements of the Act and the
       rules made thereunder relating to registration of the company under section
       8 and matters incidental or supplemental thereto have been complied with;

c. An estimate of the future annual income and expenditure of the company for
       next three years, specifying the sources of the income and the objects of the
       expenditure;

d. the declaration by each of the persons making the application.

ALTERATION OF MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES REQUIRES PRIOR
PERMISSION OF GOVERNMENT

A company registered under this section requires prior permission from:

a. Central Government (power delegated to regional directors) for alteration
       of its memorandum and

b. Central Government (power delegated to ROCs) for alteration of its articles.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.23
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

CONVERSION INTO ANY OTHER KIND OF COMPANY

A company registered under this section may convert itself into company of any
other kind only after complying with such conditions as may be prescribed in rule
21 and 22 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rule 2014 as described below:

a. A company shall pass a special resolution at a general meeting for approving
       such conversion

b. An explanatory statement to notice of such general meeting must set-out
       the details on reason of such conversion.

c. The company shall file an application in Form No. INC-18 with the Regional
       Director with the fee along with a certified true copy of the special resolution
       and a copy of the Notice convening the meeting including the explanatory
       statement for approval for conversion.

       Also attach the proof of serving of the notice served by registered post or
       hand delivery, to:

        the Chief Commissioner of Income Tax having jurisdiction over the
               company,

        Income Tax Officer who has jurisdiction over the company,

        the Charity Commissioner,

        the Chief Secretary of the State in which the registered office of the
               company is situated,

        any organisation or Department of the Central Government or State
               Government or other authority under whose jurisdiction the company
               has been operating.

        Note: If any of these authorities wish to make any representation to Regional
        Director, it shall do so within sixty days of the receipt of the notice, after
        giving an opportunity to the Company.

d. An intimation alongwith copy of the application with annexures as filed in
       Form no. INC- 18 with the Regional Director shall also go to the Registrar
       through MCA system.
2.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

e. The company shall, within a week from the date of submitting the application
       to the Regional Director, publish a notice at its own expense, and a copy of
       the notice, as published, shall be sent forthwith to the Regional Director and
       the said notice shall be in Form No. INC-19 and shall be published;

        at least once in a vernacular newspaper in the principal vernacular
               language of the district in which the registered office of the company is
               situated, and having a wide circulation in that district, and at least once
               in English language in an English newspaper having a wide circulation
               in that district; and

        on the website of the company, if any, and as may be notified or
               directed by the Central Government.

f. The company should have filed all its financial statements and Annual
       Returns upto the financial year preceding the submission of the application
       to the Regional Director and all other returns required to be filed under the
       Act up to the date of submitting the application to the Regional Director

        Note: In the event the application is made after the expiry of three months
        from the date of preceding financial year to which the financial statement
        has been filed, a statement of the financial position duly certified by
        chartered accountant made up to a date not preceding thirty days of filing
        the application shall be attached.

g. On receipt of the application, and on being satisfied, the Regional Director
       shall issue an order approving the conversion of the company into a
       company of any other kind subject to such terms and conditions as may be
       imposed in the facts and circumstances of each case.

h. Before imposing the conditions or rejecting the application, the company
       shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard by the Regional
       Director

i. On receipt of the approval of the Regional Director, the company shall
       convene a general meeting of its members to pass a special resolution for
       amending its memorandum of association and articles of association and
       the Company shall thereafter file these with the Registrar (with declaration
       to adhere conditions if any, imposed by Regional Director)
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.25
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

j. On receipt of the documents referred above, the Registrar shall register the
       documents and issue the fresh Certificate of Incorporation.

REVOCATION OF LICENSE

a. The Central Government (power delegated to regional director) may by order
       revoke the licence of the company where:

        the company contravenes any of the requirements or the conditions of
               this sections subject to which a licence is issued, or

        the affairs of the company are conducted fraudulently, or in violation of
               the objects of the company or prejudicial to public interest,

        Note: On revocation, the Registrar shall put `Limited' or `Private Limited'
        against the company's name in the register.

       Before such revocation a written notice must be served on such company and
       opportunity to be heard in the matter shall be given.

b. Where a licence is revoked and the Central Government is satisfied, that it is
       essential in the public interest; then after giving a reasonable opportunity of
       being heard; by order it may direct that

        Company be wound up under this Act. Excess assets on the winding
               up or dissolution, after the satisfaction of its debts and liabilities, may
               be transferred to:

                Another company registered under this section and having
                       similar objects, subject to such conditions as the Tribunal may
                       impose, or

                May be sold and proceeds thereof credited to the Insolvency
                       and Bankruptcy Fund formed under section 224 of the
                       Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.

        Company be amalgamated with another company registered under
               this section and having similar objects. The Central Government
               empowered with overriding effects to provide the said
               amalgamation to form single entity with such constitution, properties,
                2.26          CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               powers, rights, interest, authorities and privileges and with such
               liabilities, duties and obligations as may be specified in the order.
PENALTY/ PUNISHMENT IN CONTRAVENTION

Penalty for offences under section 8 are summarised below;

Offence                                        Penalty

Company makes any default     company shall, be punishable with fine varying
in complying with any of the  from ten lakh rupees to one crore rupees
requirements laid down in
this section                  directors and every officer of the company who is
                              in default shall be punishable with fine varying
                              from twenty-five thousand rupees to twenty-five
                              lakh rupees

Where the affairs of the every officer in default shall be liable for action
company were conducted under section 447
fraudulently

FIGURE- SUMMARY OF SUB-SECTION 6 TO 11 OF SECTION 8

                                       Contravention

                      Licence revoked                     Punishment

  Expression     Winding up             Amalgamate with    Company with 10
  Ltd. or Pvt.  Surplus Assets         Section 8 company     lakh to 1 crore
Ltd. Added to
                  transfer to:              with simlar    Director or Officer
     name                                   objectives.   with 25 thousand to

Section 8 company               Insolvency &                      25 lacs
     with simlar              Bankruptcy Fund                (Fraud u/s 447)
     objectives.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.27
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Additional reading

Relaxations available to a Section 8 Company include:

 Can call its general meeting by giving a clear 14 days' notice instead of 21
       days.

 Requirement of minimum number of directors, independent directors etc.
       does not apply.

 Need not constitute Nomination and Remuneration Committee and
       Shareholders Relationship Committee.

    6. EFFECT OF REGISTRATION [SECTION 9]

Section 9 of the Act provides for the effect of registration of a company, it states:

From the date of incorporation specified in the certificate of incorporation, the
subscribers to the memorandum and all other persons, who may become members
of such company, shall be a body corporate by the name as contained in the
memorandum

Thereafter such body corporate, by the said name, shall be capable of:

a. Exercising all the functions of an incorporated company under this Act and

b. Having perpetual succession

c. Power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and
       immovable, tangible and intangible,

d. To contract and to sue and be sued.
2.28                CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

SUMMARY OF SECTION 9
                                 Subscribers to the memorandum
                                                      and
                                            All other persons,

              who may from time to time, become members of the company

                    Registration (Certificate of Incorporation Granted)

              From the date of incorporation
        specified in the certificate of incorporation,
beceome body corporate, by the name specified in memorandum

                    Under said name

Exercising all the      Power to    To contract     Having
functions of an      acquire, hold   and to sue   perpetual
                    and dispose of  and be sued.  succession
  incorporated
    company             property

movable and         tangible and
 immovable           intangible

    7. MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION ­ MOA
          [SECTION 4]

Memorandum of association (MOA) is the fundamental document for the formation
of the company, hence considered as its charter or constitution. Memorandum
defines the relationship of the company with outsiders because it enables all those
who deals with the company to know what its powers are and what activities it can
engage in. The memorandum shall contains the following clauses:

a. Name Clause

b. Situation Clause (also called registered office clause)
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.29
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

c. Objects Clause

d. Liability Clause

e. Capital Clause (applicable, if company is formed with share capital)

f. Association Clause or Subscription Clause (specifically drafted in case of OPC)

g. Nomination Clause (applicable, in case of OPC)

Section 4 of the Act along with relevant rules from the Companies (Incorporation)
Rules 2014, provides for the requirements with respect to memorandum.

NAME CLAUSE [SECTION 4 (1) (a) READ WITH SUB-SECTION 2 TO 5]

The name of the company with the last word "Limited" in the case of a public limited
company, or "Private Limited" in the case of a private limited company.

The above clause is not applicable in case of section 8 companies.
In case of Specified IFSC Public Company10 & IFSC Private Company11, name shall
have the suffix, "International Financial Service Company" or "IFSC".

Application for reserving name for proposed company [sub-section 4]

A person may make an application in SPICe+ (Simplified Proforma for Incorporating
Company Electronically Plus: INC-32) accompanied by fee, as provided in the
Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014, to the Registrar for
reservation of a name set out in the application as name of the proposed company.

Resubmission shall be allowed within 15 days, for rectification of defect, if any.

Application for reserving the name for the changing name of existing
company [sub-section 4]

A person may make an application, using web service RUN (Reserve Unique Name)
along with fee as provided in the Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules,
2014, to the Registrar for the reservation of a name set out in the application as
the name to which the company proposes to change its name. Resubmission shall
be allowed within 15 days, for rectification of defect, if any.

10 GSR 08 (E) dated 04.01.2017
11 GSR 09 (E) dated 04.01.2017
2.30                                    CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Restriction regarding names and use of words & expressions therein [sub-
section 2 and 3]

Sub-section 2 states that the name mentioned in the memorandum shall not be:

a. Identical with or resemble too nearly to the name of an existing company
       registered under this Act or any previous company law; or

b. Such, use of which by the company will constitute an offence under any law
       for the time being in force; or

c. Such, use of which by the company is undesirable in the opinion of the
       Central Government (this power of Central Government has been delegated to
       ROC)12

       Further, sub-section 3 provides, unless the previous approval of the Central
       Government has been obtained; a company shall not be registered with that
       name;

d. Which contains any word or expression that is likely to give the impression
       that the company is in any way connected with, or having the patronage
       of, the Central Government, any State Government, or any local authority,
       corporation or body constituted by the Central Government or any State
       Government under any law for the time being in force; or

e. Which includes words or expressions namely Board; Commission; Authority;
       Undertaking; National; Union; Central; Federal; Republic; President;
       Rashtrapati; Small Scale Industries; Khadi and Village Industries Corporation;
       Financial Corporation and the like; Municipal;; Development Authority; Prime
       Minister or Chief Minister; Minister; Nation; Forest corporation; Development
       Scheme; Statute or Statutory; Court or Judiciary; Governor; Bureau; and the
       use of word Scheme with the name of Government (s), State, India, Bharat or
       any Government authority or in any manner resembling with the schemes
       launched by Central, State or local Governments and authorities.

A name is said to `resemble' when difference is only and only of

a. Plural or singular form of words in one or both names (Green Technology Ltd.
       is same as Greens Technology Ltd. and Greens Technologies Ltd.)

12 S.O. 1353(E), dated 21st May, 2014.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.31
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

b. Type and case of letters, spacing between letters, and punctuation marks used
       in one or both names (ABC Ltd. is same as A.B.C. Ltd. and A B C Ltd.)

c. Use of different tenses in one or both names (Ascend Solutions Ltd. is same
       as Ascended Solutions Ltd. and Ascending Solutions Ltd.)

d. Slight variation in the spelling of the two names including a grammatical
       variation thereof (Disc Solutions Ltd. is same as Disk Solutions Ltd. but it is
       not same as Disco Solutions Ltd)

e. Use of different phonetic spellings including use of misspelled words of an
       expression (Bee Kay Ltd is same as BK Ltd, Be Kay Ltd., B Kay Ltd., Bee K Ltd.,
       B.K. Ltd. and Beee Kay Ltd)

f. Complete translation or transliteration, and not part thereof, of an existing
       name, in Hindi or in English (National Electricity Corporation Ltd. is same as
       Rashtriya Vidyut Nigam Ltd.)

g. Use of host name such as `www' or a domain extension such as .net'. org',
       `dot' or `com' in one or both names (Ultra Solutions Ltd. is same as
       Ultrasolutions.com Ltd. But Supreme Ultra Solutions Ltd. is not the same as
       Ultrasolutions.com Ltd.)

h. The order of words in the names (Ravi Builders and Contractors Ltd. is same
       as Ravi Contractors and Builders Ltd.)

i. Use of the definite or indefinite article in one or both names (Congenial Tours
       Ltd. is same as A Congenial Tours Ltd. and The Congenial Tours Ltd. But Isha
       Industries Limited is not the same as Anisha Industries Limited.)

j. Addition of the name of a place to an existing name, which does not contain
       the name of any place; (If Salvage Technologies Ltd. is an existing name, it is
       same as Salvage Technologies Delhi Ltd. But Retro Pharmaceuticals Ranchi
       Ltd. is not the same as Retro Pharmaceuticals Chennai Ltd.)

k. addition, deletion, or modification of numerals or expressions denoting
       numerals in an existing name, unless the numeral represents any brand
       (Thunder Services Ltd is same as Thunder 11 Services Ltd and One Thunder
       Services Ltd.)

Students may also refer to 23 instances specified in rule 8A of the Companies
(Incorporation) Rules 2014 that tantamount to "undesirable names".
2.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Reservation of name [sub-section 5]

Upon receipt of an application the Registrar may, on the basis of information and
documents furnished along with the application, reserve the name for a period of
twenty days from the date of approval or such other period.

Provided that in case of an application for reservation of name or for change of
its name by an existing company, the Registrar may reserve the name for a period
of sixty days from the date of approval.

1. While allotting names, the Registrar of Companies concerned should exercise
       due care to ensure that the names are not in contravention of the provisions
       of the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. It is
       necessary that Registrars are fully familiar with the provisions of the said Act.13

2. An application for extension of reservation of name under rule 9A of the
       Companies (Incorporation) Rules 2014 can be made before expiry of 20 days.

a. For another 20 days (total of 40 days) with fee of ` 1000, which may be further
       extend by another 20 day (total of 60 days) with fee of ` 2000.

                                                       Or

b. For another 40 days (total of 60 days) with fee of 3000.

Cancellation of reserved name [sub-section 5]

Where after reservation of name, it is found that name was applied by furnishing
wrong or incorrect information, then

a. if the company has not been incorporated, the reserved name shall be
       cancelled and the person who has made the application shall be liable to a
       penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees;

b. if the company has been incorporated, the Registrar may, after giving the
       company an opportunity of being heard;

         Either direct the company to change its name within a period of 3
                months, after passing an ordinary resolution;

         Take action for striking off the name of the company from the register
                of companies; or

         Make a petition for winding up of the company.

13 General Circular No. 29/2014, dated 11th July, 2014
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.33
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Example: Mr. Anil Desai, has applied for reservation of company name with a prefix
"Sanwariya". He claimed that the Prefix "Sanwariya" is registered trademark in his
name. Later on, it is found that the said prefix is not registered with Mr. Anil Desai,
however, he has formed company by giving incorrect documents/ information
while applying the name of the company. In such case, the Registrar shall take
action as per the provisions of the Act after giving opportunity of being heard.

SITUATION CLAUSE - SECTION 4(1)(b)

Section 4(1)(b) requires, the memorandum of a company shall mention the name of
state, where registered office is proposed to be situated.

The situation (place) of registered office is important from perspective of:

a. Establishing the domicile of company for the purpose of determining
       jurisdictions in context to compliance (ROC, RD etc.), judicial aspects (bench
       of NCLT, high court etc.), fiscal aspects (taxation), and for many other
       purposes.

b. Place at which the company's statutory books must normally be kept (in case
       of public company, general meeting also required to be conducted at
       registered office or in the city where it is situated).

c. Act as the address to which notices and other communications can be sent.

A company shall, within thirty days of its incorporation and at all times thereafter,
have a registered office capable of receiving and acknowledging all
communications and notices as may be addressed to it.

OBJECT CLAUSE & DOCTRINE OF ULTRA VIRES

Section 4(1)(c), requires the memorandum of a company shall state the objects for
which the company is proposed to be incorporated and any matter considered
necessary in furtherance thereof.

Specified IFSC Public Company & IFSC Private company shall state its objects to
do financial services activities as permitted under the Special Economic Zones
Act, 2005 read with SEZ Rules, 2006 and any matter considered necessary in
furtherance thereof in accordance with license to operate, from International
Financial Services Centre located in an approved multi services Special Economic
Zone, granted by the RBI, SEBI, or IRDA.
2.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

A company can't depart away to do anything beyond or outside its objects stated
in memorandum and if any act done beyond that will be ultra vires and void, same
can't be ratified even by the assent of the whole body of shareholders.

Note: Acts ultra-vires to the authority of the directors may be ratified by the
company.14 Articles provide for regulations inside scope established by MOA, hence
acts beyond (ultra-vires) the articles, can be ratified by the shareholders provided
the relevant provisions are not beyond the memorandum. To illustrate; One of the
director is authorised to issue cheque of ` 10000, but he issued for ` 12000; company
can ratify so.

It is worth noting here that Memorandum of company can be altered to widen the scope
of objects, but such alteration shall have prospective effect only; not the retrospective,
hence an act once ultra-vires remain so ever.

A company may do anything which is incidental to and consequential upon the
objects specified and such act will not be an ultra vires act.15 To illustrate for trade
one have rent or own a building, issue invoices, make and receive payments.

Essence of the Doctrine of Ultra Vires

The Doctrine of Ultra Vires is meant to protect shareholders and the creditors of the
company or anyone who deals with the company.

Enunciation of Doctrine of Ultra Vires

The doctrine of ultra vires was first enunciated by the House of Lords in a classic case,
Ashbury Railway Carriage and Iron Co. Ltd. v. Riche.16

The memorandum of the company in the said case defined its objects thus: "The
objects for which the company is established are to make and sell, or lend or hire,
railway plants to carry on the business of mechanical engineers and general
contractors......."

The company entered into a contract with M/s. Riche, a firm of railway contractors to
finance the construction of a railway line in Belgium. On subsequent repudiation of
this contract by the company on the ground of its being ultra vires, Riche brought a
case for damages on the ground of breach of contract, as according to him the words

14 Rajendra Nath Dutta v. Shilendra Nath Mukherjee, (1982) 52 Com Cases 293 (Cal.)
15 Attorney-General v. Great Eastern Rly Co (1880) 5 AC 473
16 (1878) L.R. 7 H.L. 653
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                           2.35
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

"general contractors" in the objects clause gave power to the company to enter into
such a contract and, therefore, it was within the powers of the company. More so
because the contract was ratified by a majority of shareholders.

The House of Lords held that the contract was ultra vires the company and,
therefore, null and void. The term "general contractor" was interpreted to indicate
as the making generally of such contracts as are connected with the business of
mechanical engineers. The Court held that if every shareholder of the company had
been in the room and had said, "That is a contract which we desire to make, which
we authorise the directors to make", still it would be ultra vires. The shareholders
cannot ratify such a contract, as the contract was ultra vires the objects clause,
which by Act of Parliament, they were prohibited from doing.

Effects of Doctrine of Ultra Vires

The key effect will be as under:

a. Whenever an ultra vires act has been or is about to be undertaken, any
       member of the company can get an injunction to restrain it from proceeding
       with it.17

b. Neither party (even outsider) can sue for enforcement or specific performance
       of such agreement. Reason explained under heading Constructive Notice

LIABILITY CLAUSE

Section 4(1)(d) requires, the memorandum of a company shall state:

a. In the case of a company limited by shares the liability of its members is
       limited to the amount unpaid, if any, on the shares held by them; and

b. In the case of a company limited by guarantee, the amount up to which
       each member undertakes to contribute:

        to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound-up while
               he is a member or within one year after he ceases to be a member, for
               payment of the debts and liabilities of the company or of such debts and
               liabilities as may have been contracted before he ceases to be a member,
               as the case may be; and

        to the costs, charges and expenses of winding-up and

               for adjustment of the rights of the contributories among themselves

17 Attorney-General v. Great Eastern Rly Co (1880) 5 AC 473
2.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Note: Those shareholders who are members of the company at the time of its
winding-up are included in list 'A'. They are primarily liable for making payment to
the company at the time of its winding-up. While list 'B' consists of those persons
who were the members of the company during the 12 months preceding the date
of winding-up. B list contributories are liable to contribute if the amount realised
from the contributories of list `A' is not sufficient to discharge the liabilities of the
company.

Example - Modern Furniture limited, a company limited by shares having share
capital divided into shares with face value of ` 10 each, out of which ` 8 is called
up. Mr. Singh who is having 200 share paid all ` 8 on each of share he hold, while
Ms. Sarla owning 100 shares paid ` 10 (Rupee 2 in advance); whereas Mr. Sanju
owning 250 shares paid ` 6 per share (` 2 in arrear per share). Liability of Mr. Singh,
Ms. Sarla, and Mr. Sanju shall be maximum upto ` 400, Nil, and ` 1000 only;
respectively.

CAPITAL CLAUSE

Section 4 (1) (e) (i) requires, in the case of a company having a share capital, the
memorandum of a company shall state;

a. The amount of share capital with which the company is to be registered
       (usually termed as authorised or nominal capital); and

b. The division thereof into shares of a fixed amount (i.e. face value and number
       of shares); and

c. The number of shares which the subscribers to the memorandum agree to
       subscribe which shall not be less than one share.

SUBSCRIPTION CLAUSE

Section 4 (1) (e) (ii) requires, the memorandum of a company shall state, the number
of shares each subscriber to the memorandum intends to take, indicated opposite
his name, in the case of a company having a share capital.

NOMINATION CLAUSE (ONLY IN CASE OF ONE PERSON COMPANY)

Section 4 (1) (f), requires, the memorandum of a company shall state the name of the
person (nominee) who, in the event of death of the subscriber, shall become the
member of the company, in the case of One Person Company.

Note: This provision is corresponding to first proviso to section 3 (1) already
discussed earlier in this chapter.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                                                           2.37
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

FORMS AND SCHEDULE RELATED TO MEMORANDM [SUB-SECTION 6]

The memorandum of a company shall be in respective forms specified in Tables A,
B, C, D and E in Schedule I to the Act, as the case shown in figure;
Forms of MOA

      Table E           Table A                           Table B
Memorandum of      Memorandum of                    Memorandum of
association of an  association of a                 association of a
                   company limited                  company limited
     unlimited
  company and           by shares                     by guarantee
  having share                                      and not having a
                   Forms of MOA
      capital                                         share capital

     Table D             Table C
Memorandum of      Memorandum of
association of an  association of a
                   company limited
     unlimited
  company and        by guarantee
not having share     and having a
                     share capital
      capital

1. As per section 39918 of the Act, a memorandum is a public document.
Consequently, every person entering into a contract with the company is presumed
to have the knowledge of the conditions contained therein.

2. As per section 4 (7), any provision in the memorandum or articles, in the case
of a company limited by guarantee and not having a share capital, shall not give
any person a right to participate in the divisible profits of the company otherwise
than as a member. If the contrary is done, it shall be void.

18 Section 399 of the Act, does not form part of the syllabus at the Intermediate syllabus.
2.38  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

    8. ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION ­ AOA [SECTION 5]

Actually, articles of association of a company contains internal rules and regulations
of the company. It is complementary to Memorandum and together give effect as
charter of the company. Article establish a contract between the company and the
members and between the members inter se. This contract governs the ordinary
rights and obligations incidental to membership in the company19

Section 5 of the Companies Act, 2013 and rule 10 and 11 of the Companies
(Incorporation) Rules, 2014 seeks to provide the contents and model of articles of
association. The provisions are state below;

CONTENTS AND MATTERS TO BE INCLUDED [SUB-SECTION 1 AND 2]

The articles of a company shall contain;

a. The regulations for management of the company.

b. Such matters as may be prescribed (rules 11 of the Companies (Incorporation)
       Rules, 2014 refers to the matters specified in the model forms given under
       schedule I to the Act).

However, a company may also include such additional matters in its articles as may
be considered necessary for its management.

PROVISION FOR ENTRENCHMENT [SUB-SECTION 3 TO 5]

Entrenchment is the chronic or deep-rooted fact of an attitude, habit, or belief that
is firmly established or accustomed, therefore it become difficult or unlikely to
change. To illustrate ­ Men don't cry

Entrenchment may be possible for processes, as well as procedures in both way; that
processes are so well established, it become difficult to change them or make process
of change so rigid that process become well established.

Students, here we are studying the word entrenchment with sense of making
the process of alteration in articles more difficult, in order to enhance the
protection.

Usually an article of association may be altered by passing special resolution but
entrenchment makes it more difficult to change the articles, in manner specified ahead;

19 Naresh Chandra Sanyal v. Calcutta Stock Exchange Association Ltd. AIR 1971 SC 422
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.39
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Article may contain provisions for entrenchment [Sub-section 3]
The articles may provide that specified provisions contained in it may be altered
only if conditions that are more restrictive and harder than those applicable in the
case of a special resolution, are met or complied with.
Manner of inclusion of the entrenchment provision [Sub-section 4]
The provisions for entrenchment shall only be made either:
a. On formation of a company, or
b. By an amendment in the articles agreed to

        By all the members of the company in the case of a private company
               and

        By a special resolution in the case of a public company.
Summary of Section 5(4)

  Timing of   At Formation      Private Co. - All members
Entrenchment                 Public Co. - Special Resolution
              After came in
                existance

Notice to the registrar of the entrenchment provision [Sub-section 5 read with
Rule 10 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014]

The company shall give notice to the Registrar of entrenchment provisions included
in article

a. In the SPICe+(Simplified Proforma for Incorporating company Electronically
       Plus: INC-32), along with the fee as provided in the Companies (Registration
       offices and fees) Rules, 2014 at the time of incorporation of the company, and

b. In case of existing companies, in Form No. MGT-14 within thirty days from
       the date of entrenchment of the articles, along with the fee as provided in the
       Companies (Registration offices and fees) Rules, 2014.
2.40               CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Summary of Section 5(5) and Rule 10

   Notice of                 At Formation - In the SPICe+
Entrenchment
                   After came in existence - Form No. MGT-14
                                     within thirty days

MODEL FORMS OF ARTICLES [SUB-SECTION 6 TO 8]

Sub-section 6 provides that the articles of a company shall be in respective forms
specified in Tables, F, G, H, I and J in Schedule I to the Act as specified in figure.
Such forms are called model forms.

Further, sub-section 7 provides leeway to company, in adopting all or any of the
regulations contained in the model articles applicable to such company.

Forms of AOA

      Table J            Table F           Table G
                       Articles of
     Articles of   association of a       Articles of
association of an  company limited    association of a
                       by shares     company limited
     unlimited                       by guarantee and
company and not    Model forms of      having a share
                          AOA
   having share                             capital
       capital

            Table I                        Table H

          Articles of                     Articles of
      association of an               association of a
                                     company limited
          unlimited                  by guarantee and
        company and
        having share                    not having a
                                        share capital
            capital
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.41
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Students are advised to take note:

Sub-section 8 provides that in case of any company, which is registered after the
commencement of this Act, in so far as the registered articles of such company do
not exclude or modify the regulations contained in the model articles applicable to
such company, those regulations shall, so far as applicable, be the regulations of
that company in the same manner and to the extent as if they were contained in
the duly registered articles of the company ­ Either exclude or modify expressly
or else it applies what stated in model applicable to company.

Sub-section 9 restricts the scope of section to the articles either registered or
amended under this Act - Hence no provision of this section (section 5) shall be
applicable to articles registered under previous company law; provided not
amended under this Act.

Illustration ­ Question & Answer

Question ­ Highlight differences between the MOA and AOA

Answer - The key differences between the MOA and AOA includes;

1. Content - The memorandum contains the fundamental conditions as basis of
incorporation. It lays down the parameters that define relation of company with
outsiders. The Articles contain internal regulations of the company; hence regulate
the relationship between company and the members and members inter se.

2. Supremacy - Memorandum cannot include any clause that is contrary to the
provisions of the law, whereas the articles shall be subordinate to both the law and
memorandum. Therefore, in case on conflict among the two, the MOA shall
prevail.

3. Scope -Memorandum lays down the scope beyond which the activities of the
company cannot go. An act done by a company beyond the scope of the
memorandum are ultra vires and void. They cannot be ratified even by all the
shareholders. Articles provide for regulations inside scope established by MOA,
hence acts beyond the articles can be ratified by the shareholders provided the
relevant provisions are not beyond the memorandum.
2.42  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

    9. DOCTRINE OF CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE AND
          DOCTRINE OF INDOOR MANAGEMENT

Both the doctrines carries the counter effect to each other, doctrine of constructive
notice put onus on outsider to be aware of what is stated in MOA and AOA; whereas
doctrine of indoor management protects such outsider from internal irregularities.

DOCTRINE OF CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE

Essence of Doctrine of Constructive Notice

All those who are dealing with company deemed to be aware of what is stated in
its MOA and AOA, in its true perspective, because both this documents are public
documents.

Section 399* provides that the Memorandum and Articles when registered with
Registrar of Companies `become public documents' and then they can be inspected
by any one by electronic means on payment of the prescribed fee.

Further, Section 17 provides that a company shall on payment of the prescribed
fee send a copy of each of the following documents to a member within seven days
of the request being made by him

a. Memorandum;

b. Articles;

c. Every agreement and every resolution referred to in sub-section (1) of section
       117, if and so far as they have not been embodied in the memorandum and
       articles.

Any failure will make the company as well as every officer in default liable to a fine
of one thousand rupee for each day during which default continues or one lakh
rupee whichever is less.

*Section 399 is not part of syllabus, but essential to develop understanding.

Enunciation of Doctrine of Constructive Notice
The doctrine of constructive notice is based on the rule laid down in Ernest v Nicholls.20
It was held for the first time that any person who is dealing with the company is deemed

20 (1857) 6 HL Cas 401
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                              2.43
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

to be familiar with the contents of all the public documents of the company. The
memorandum and the articles of association of every company are registered with the
Registrar of Companies. The office of the Registrar is a public office. Hence, the
memorandum and the articles of association become public documents. It is therefore
the duty of person dealing with a company to inspect its public documents and make
sure that his contract is in conformity with their provisions.

As observed by Lord Hatherley whether a person actually reads them or not, he is to be
in the same position as if he had read them.

Effect of Doctrine of Constructive Notice

Every person (dealing with company) shall be presumed to know the contents of the
documents and understood them in their true perspective.

Absence of notice of MOA and AOA cannot be an excuse to claim relief for
outsiders.21 Even if the party dealing with the company does not have actual notice
of the contents of these documents, it is presumed that he has an implied
(constructive) notice of them.

Example - One of the articles of a Modern Furniture Limited provides that a cheque
below ` 1 lakh may be signed by single director but if above ` 1 lakh shall be signed
by at-least two directors. Similar instructions issued to bank with which MFL have
account, as well. M/s Sagwan Wood Works, a vendor accepts a cheque of
` 2.20 lakh, signed only by single director. Considering Doctrine of Constructive
Notice, the M/s Sagwan Wood Works (payee) has no right to claim, when cheque
will be returned without payment by bank.

Criticism of Doctrine of Constructive Notice

The `Doctrine of Constructive Notice' is an unreal doctrine. People know a company
through its officers and not through its documents. Since it does not take notice of
the realities of business life, hence caused inconvenient for business transaction.

To illustrate, where the directors or other officers of the company were
empowered under the articles to exercise certain powers subject only to certain
prior approvals or sanctions of the shareholders, it is difficult for an outsider to
ascertain whether necessary sanctions and approvals have been obtained before a
certain officer exercises his powers or not.

21 Kotla Venkataswamy v. Chinta Ramamurthy. AIR (1934) Mad 579
2.44  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Therefore, to mitigate such a situation, those dealing with the company can assume
that if the directors or other officers are entering into those transactions, they
would have obtained the necessary sanctions. This is known as the `Doctrine of
Indoor Management' or Turquand's Rule, and act as an exception to the
constructive notice.

The Europe Communities Act, 1972 has abrogated this doctrine through effect of
its section 9. Even in India also the Calcutta High Court22 enforced a security which
was not signed in accordance with the company's articles.

DOCTRINE OF INDOOR MANAGEMENT

Essence of Doctrine of Indoor Management

The people who are dealing with company are entitled to presume that internal
proceedings and requirements has been duly met.

Enunciation of Doctrine of Indoor Management

The Doctrine of Indoor Management was first laid down in the case of Royal British
Bank v. Turquand23

The directors of a company were authorised by the articles to borrow on bonds
such sums of money as should from time to time, by a resolution of the company
in general meeting, be authorised to be borrowed. The directors gave a bond to
Turquand without the authority of any such resolution. The question arose whether
the company was liable on the bond. Held, the company was liable on the bond, as
Turquand was entitled to assume that the resolution of the company in general
meeting had been passed.

Rationale of Doctrine of Indoor Management

What happens internally in a company is not a matter of public knowledge. An
outsider can only presume the intentions of a company, but not know the
information he/she is not privy to.

If not for the doctrine, the company could escape creditors by denying the authority
of officials to act on its behalf.

22 Charnock Collieries Co Ltd v. Bholanath Dhar. ILR (1912) 39 Cal 810.
23 (1856) 6 E & B 327
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.45
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Exceptions to Doctrine of Indoor Management

Relief on the ground of `indoor management' cannot be claimed by an outsider
dealing with the company in the following circumstances;

a. Knowledge of irregularity - In case this `outsider' has actual knowledge of
       irregularity within the company, the benefit under the rule of indoor
       management would no longer be available. In fact, he/she may well be
       considered part of the irregularity.

b. Negligence: If with a minimum of effort, the irregularities within a company
       could be discovered, the benefit of the rule of indoor management would not
       apply. The protection of the rule is also not available where the circumstances
       surrounding the contract are so suspicious as to invite inquiry, and the
       outsider dealing with the company does not make proper inquiry.

c. Forgery: The rule does not apply where a person relies upon a document that
       turns out to be forged since nothing can validate forgery. A company can
       never be held bound for forgeries committed by its officers.

d. Where the question is in regard to the very existence of an agency.

e. Where a pre-condition is required to be fulfilled before company itself can
       exercise a particular power. In other words, the act done is not merely ultra
       vires the directors/officers but ultra vires the company itself.

Illustration

The doctrine of indoor management is considered to be ______ to the doctrine of
constructive notice.

a. Exception

b. Extension

c. Alternative

d. Not related

Answer ­ a. Exception
2.46  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

    10. ACT TO OVERRIDE MEMORANDUM,
          ARTICLES, ETC. [SECTION 6]

The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect to the provisions contained in;
a. Memorandum of company; or
b. Articles of company; or
c. Any agreement executed by it; or
d. Any resolution passed by the company in general meeting or by its Board of

       Directors
Whether the same be registered, executed or passed, as the case may be, before
or after the commencement of this Act
Any provision contained in the memorandum, articles, agreement or resolution, to
the extent in conflict to the provisions of the Act; shall be void.

Example - Section 123 declares that no dividend shall be paid by a company except
out of profits. The force of this section cannot be undone by any provision in the
articles of association, because the articles cannot sanction something which is
forbidden by the Act. Even still it attempts then shall be void.

Note: This section starts with saving clause i.e. "Save as otherwise ....", means if any
other section of the Act says that provisions contained in the memorandum,
articles, agreement or resolution is superior then we will treat it accordingly.

Example - Section 47 of the Act deals with voting power of members. A notification
dated 5th June, 2015 says that section 47 is applicable to a private company subject
to its Article of Association (AOA). Now if AOA of a private company says that
section 47 is not applicable to it then, in this case AOA will become superior and
section 47 of the Act will not be applicable.

    11. EFFECT OF MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES
          [SECTION 10]

Sub-section 1 to Section 10 aims to impart contractual force to the Memorandum
and Articles. It provides, when the memorandum and articles got registered; it shall
bind the
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                          2.47
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

a. Members to the company;

b. Company to the members;

c. Members to the members;

To observe all the provisions of the memorandum and of the articles, as signatory
thereof.

Example (Member to the Company)

The articles of association of the Steel Bros & Co Ltd contained clauses to the effect
that on the bankruptcy of a member his shares would be sold to a person and at a
price fixed by the directors. Borland, a shareholder, was adjudicated bankrupt. His
trustee in bankruptcy claimed that he (Borland) was not bound by these provisions
and should be at liberty to sell the shares at their true value. But it was held that
contracts contained in the articles of association is one of the original incidents of
the shares. Shares having been purchased on those terms and conditions, it is
impossible to say that those terms and conditions are not to be observed.24

Example (Company to the Member)

The articles of the Odessa Waterworks Co provided that "the directors may, with
the sanction of the company at general meeting, declare a dividend to be paid to
the members". Instead of paying the dividend in cash to the shareholders a
resolution was passed to give them debenture bonds. In an action by Mr. Wood, a
member to restrain the directors from acting on the resolution, it was held that
"The question is whether that which is proposed to be done in the present case is
in accordance with the articles of association of the company. Those articles provide
that the directors may, with the sanction of a general meeting, declare a dividend
to be paid to shareholders. Prima facie that means to be paid in cash. The debenture
bonds proposed to be issued are not a payment in cash."25

Example (Member to the Member)

Mr. Rayfield was a shareholder in a company. Clause 11 of the articles of company
required him to inform the directors of his intention to transfer his shares in the
company and which provided that the directors will take the said shares equally
between them at a fair value. In accordance with this provision the Mr. Rayfield so

24 Borland's Trustee v Steel Bros & Co Ltd (1901) 1 Ch 279
25 Wood v Odessa Waterworks Co (1889) 42Ch D 636
2.48  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

notified the directors (who are members as well), who contended that they were
not bound to take and pay for the shares. They said, articles could not impose such
obligation upon them in their capacity as directors. Their argument was set aside
by the court by treating those directors as members. Accordingly, the directors
(being members) were compelled to take the Mr. Rayfield's shares at a fair value.26

Students are advised to take Note;

1. Articles bind the members to the company and the company to the members.
But neither of them is bound to an outsider to give effect to the articles. "No Article
can constitute a contract between the company and a third person."

Example - The articles of association of a company, La Trinidad contained a clause
to the effect that Browne should be a director and should not be removable till
after 1888. He was, however, removed earlier and had brought an action to restrain
the company from excluding him. It was held that there was no contract between
Browne and the company. No outsider can enforce articles against the Company
even if they purport to give him certain rights.27

2. Further sub-section 2 to section 10 provides, all monies payable by any member
to the company under the memorandum or articles shall be a debt due from him
to the company.

Example - A company can recover calls in arrear from a member as forcefully as it
is recovering loan due.

    12. ALTERATION OF MEMORANDUM [SECTION 13]

PROCEDURE OF ALTERATION OF MEMORANDUM

Alteration includes the making of additions, omissions and substitutions. Section
13 of the Act along with Rules 29 to 32 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules,
2014 provides the provisions that deals with the alteration of the memorandum,
detailed below;

26 Rayfield v Hands (1958) 2 WLR 851
27 Browne v La Trinidad (1887)37 Ch D 1
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.49
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Alteration by special resolution [Sub-section 1]

Company may alter the provisions of its memorandum with the approval of the
members by a special resolution. Further, as per section 13(6) (a) company shall file
with the Registrar, such special resolution.

Name change of the company [Sub-section 2 and 3]

As per sub-section 1, any change in the name of a company shall be effected only
with the approval of the Central Government (power delegated to ROC by Central
Government)28 in writing in Form No. INC-24 along with fee.

However, no such approval shall be necessary where the change in the name of the
company is only the addition/deletion of the word "Private", on the conversion of
any one class of companies to another class in accordance with the provisions of
the Act.

The change of name shall not be allowed to a company which has not filed annual
returns or financial statements due for filing with the Registrar or which has failed
to pay or repay matured deposits or debentures or interest thereon. Once the
necessary documents filled or payment or repayment made then change shall be
allowed.

As per clause (b) to sub-section 6 to section 13, the approval from the Central
Government, shall be filed with registrar by the company. Practically importance of
provision is demeaned as power of central government is already delegated to
ROC.

Further, as per sub-section 2, on any change in the name of a company, the
Registrar shall enter the new name in the register of companies in place of the
old name and issue a fresh certificate of incorporation in the Form No. INC-25
with the new name and the change in the name shall be complete and effective
only on the issue of such a certificate.

Example ­ Tata Sky Limited changed its Name to Tata Play Limited (CIN
U92120MH2001PLC130365).

Industrial Insight

On August 24, 1910, a company was registered in India under the name Imperial
Tobacco Company of India Limited. As the Company's ownership progressively

28 Notification S.O. 1353(E), dated 21st May, 2014
2.50  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Indianised, the name of the Company was changed to India Tobacco Company
Limited in 1970 and then to I.T.C. Limited in 1974. In recognition of the ITC's multi-
business portfolio encompassing a wide range of businesses, the full stops in the
Company's name were removed effective September 18, 2001. The Company now
stands rechristened 'ITC Limited,' where 'ITC' is today no longer an acronym or an
initialised form.

Students are advised to that note that:

Even If a company has to rectify its name under section 16, then also, nothing shall
prevent such company from subsequently changing its name in accordance with the
provisions of section 13.

RECTIFICATION OF NAME OF COMPANY [SECTION 16]

Where Central Government (power of Central Government under this section
conferred (delegated) upon Regional Directors by section 458 of the Act)29 is of
opinion that name (original or revised/new) of company is identical with or too nearly
resembles to the name by which a company in existence;

a. On its own or

b. On an application by a proprietor of already registered trade mark under the
       Trade Marks Act, 1999.

Then it may direct the company to change its name;

The company shall change its name or new name, as the case may be, within a period
of three months from the issue of such direction, after adopting an ordinary
resolution for the purpose.

Note - Application by a proprietor of registered trade mark shall be made within three
years of incorporation or registration or change of name of the company

Further, the company, after changing its name or obtains a new name shall give notice
of the change to the Registrar along with the order of the Central Government
(Regional Directors) within a period of fifteen days from the date of such change.

Registrar on receipt of notice shall carry out necessary changes in the certificate of
incorporation and the memorandum.

29 S.O. 4090(E), dated 19th December, 2016
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                       2.51
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

If a company is in default in complying with any direction given under sub-section
(1), the Central Government shall allot a new name to the company in such manner
as may be prescribed and the Registrar shall enter the new name in the register of
companies in place of the old name and issue a fresh certificate of incorporation
with the new name, which the company shall use thereafter:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent a company from
subsequently changing its name in accordance with the provisions of section 13.

Change in the registered office [Sub-section 4, 5, and 7]

Application (sub-section 4]

The alteration of the memorandum relating to the place of the registered office
from one State to another shall not have any effect unless it is approved by the
Central Government (power delegated to Regional Director by Central
Government)30 on an application in Form No. INC-23 along with the fee and shall
be accompanied by the following documents, namely;

a. Copy of Memorandum of Association, with proposed alterations;

b. Copy of the minutes of the general meeting at which the resolution
       authorising such alteration was passed, giving details of the number of votes
       cast in favour or against the resolution;

c. Copy of Board Resolution or Power of Attorney or the executed vakalatnama,
       as the case may be.

d. List of creditors and debenture holders

e. Acknowledgment of service of a copy of the application with complete
       annexures to the Registrar and Chief Secretary of the State Government or
       Union territory where the registered office is situated at the time of filing the
       application.

Advertisement in Newspapers

The Company not more than thirty days before the date of filing the above
application, shall advertise in the Form No. INC-26 in the vernacular newspaper in
the principal vernacular language in the district and in English language in an

30 Notification S.O. 4090(E), dated 19th December, 2016
2.52  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

English newspaper with wide circulation in the state in which the registered office
of the company is situated.

Dispose of the application by central government [sub-section 5]

The Central Government (power delegated to Regional Director by Central
Government) shall dispose of the application of change of place of the registered
office within a period of 60 days. Before passing of order, Central Government may
satisfy itself that-

a. the alteration has the consent of the creditors, debenture-holders and other
       persons concerned with the company, or

b. the sufficient provision has been made by the company either for the due
       discharge of all its debts and obligations, or

c. adequate security has been provided for such discharge.

Filing of the certified copy of the order with the registrar [sub-section 7]

Where an alteration of the memorandum results in the transfer of the registered
office of a company from one State to another, a certified copy of the order of the
Central Government approving the alteration shall be filed by the company with
the Registrar of each of the States in Form No. INC-28 along with the fee within
thirty days from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order, who shall register
the same.

Issue of fresh certificate of incorporation [sub-section 7]

The Registrar of the State where the registered office is being shifted to, shall issue
a fresh certificate of incorporation indicating the alteration.

Change in the object of the company [Sub-section 8 and 9]

Who can make change in object clause & How? [Sub-section 8]

Where the company has raised money from public through prospectus and has any
un-utilised amount out of the money so raised, can change the objects for which the
money so raised is to be applied only after passing a special resolution through
postal ballot and the notice in respect of the resolution for altering the objects shall
contain the following particulars, namely;

a. Total money received;

b. Total money utilized for the objects stated in the prospectus;
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.53
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

c. Un-utilized amount out of the money so raised through prospectus,

d. Particulars of the proposed alteration or change in the objects;

e. Justification for the alteration or change in the objects;

f. Amount proposed to be utilised for the new objects;

g. Estimated financial impact of the proposed alteration on the earnings and cash
       flow of the company;

h. Other relevant information which is necessary for the members to take an
       informed decision on the proposed resolution;

i. Place from where any interested person may obtain a copy of the notice of
       resolution to be passed.

Advertisement [Sub-section 8]

The advertisement giving details of each resolution to be passed for change in
objects, simultaneously to the dispatch of postal ballot notices to shareholders; shall
be:

a. Published in the newspapers (one in English and one in vernacular language)
       which is in circulation at the place where the registered office of the company
       is situated and

b. Hosted on the website of the company, if any.

Dissenting shareholders to change of object [Sub-section 8]

The dissenting shareholders shall be given an opportunity to exit by the
promoters and shareholders having control in accordance with regulations to be
specified by the Securities and Exchange Board of India.

Registrar to certify the registration on alteration of the objects [sub-section 9]

The Registrar shall register any alteration of the memorandum with respect to the
objects of the company and certify the registration within a period of 30 days from the
date of filing of the special resolution under clause (a) to sub-section 6 of this section.

Sub-section 10 provides that alteration made under this section (section 13) shall
have effect only after it has been registered in accordance with provisions of
section.

Sub-section 11 states any alteration of the memorandum, in the case of a company
2.54  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

limited by guarantee and not having a share capital, intending to give any person
a right to participate in the divisible profits of the company otherwise than as a
member, shall be void. This provision is confirming and extending provision to
Section 4(7).

    13. ALTERATION OF ARTICLES [SECTION 14]

Section 14 of the Companies Act, 2013, vests companies with power to alter its
articles. A company cannot divest itself of these powers31. Matters as to which the
memorandum is silent can be dealt with by the alteration of article. The law with
respect to alteration of articles is as follows:

ALTERATION BY SPECIAL RESOLUTION [SUB-SECTION 1]

A company may alter its articles by a special resolution, subject to the provisions
of this Act and the conditions contained in its memorandum. Alteration of articles
include alterations having the effect of conversion of a private company into a
public company or vice-versa,

Any alteration having the effect of conversion of a public company into a private
company shall not be valid unless it is approved by an order of the Central
Government on an application made within sixty days from the date of passing of
special resolution, be filed with Regional Director in e-Form No. RD-1 along with
the fee as provided in the Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014
and shall be accompanied by the following documents, namely:

a. Draft copy of Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association, with
       proposed alterations;

b. Copy of the minutes of the general meeting at which the special resolution
       authorising such alteration was passed together with details of votes cast in
       favour and or against with names of dissenters;

c. Copy of Board resolution or Power of Attorney dated not earlier than thirty
       days, as the case may be, authorising to file application for such conversion;

d. Declaration by a key managerial personnel regarding the compliance under
       difference section of the Act and rules made there under;

31 Andrews v. Gas Meter Co. (1897) 1 Ch. 161
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.55
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

In case of a private company, where post alteration the articles no longer include
the restrictions and limitations which are required to be included in the articles of
a private company under this Act, then such company shall cease to be a private
company, from the date of such alteration.

FILING OF ALTERATION WITH THE REGISTRAR [SUB-SECTION 2]

Every alteration of the articles and a copy of the order of the Central Government
approving the alteration, shall be filed with the Registrar, together with a printed
copy of the altered articles, within a period of fifteen days in Form No. INC 27
along with fee, who (Registrar) shall register the same.

Sub-section 3 provides that alteration made under sub-section 1 and registered
under sub-section 2 subject to provision of this, shall be valid and have effect as if
it were originally contained in the Articles.

    14. ALTERATION OF MEMORANDUM OR
          ARTICLES TO BE NOTED IN EVERY COPY
          [SECTION 15]

Section 15 of the Act requires that every alteration made in memorandum and
articles of a company shall be noted in every copy. Be it issued in electronic form
or otherwise. [MOA and AOA considered to be public document under section 399.]
If a company makes any default in complying with the stated provisions, the
company and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of one
thousand rupees for every copy of the articles issued without such alteration.

    15. REGISTERED OFFICE OF COMPANY [SECTION 12]

A company is considered to be a separate legal entity from the members. Once a
company gets incorporated, it is required to maintain a registered office. This is a
physical office where the corporation will receive service of legal documents from
ROC or in case of a lawsuit, etc.

This address cannot be a P.O. Box but must be a physical location where someone
is present, to receive service of legal documents during normal business hours. It
2.56  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

could be different from a Head Office or Corporate office.

Section 12 of the Companies Act, 2013 seeks to provide for the registered office of
the companies for the communication and serving of necessary documents,
notices, letters etc. The domicile and the nationality of a company is determined by
the place of its registered officer. This is also important for determining the
jurisdiction of the court.

REGISTERED OFFICE & VERIFICATION THEREOF [SUB-SECTION 1 & 2]

As per sub-section 1, a company shall, within thirty days of its incorporation and
at all times thereafter, have a registered office capable of receiving and
acknowledging all communications and notices as may be addressed to it.

Further, sub-section 2 requires the company shall furnish to the Registrar verification
of its registered office within a period of thirty days of its incorporation.

With the respected specified IFSC public & IFSC private companies, they shall have its
registered office at the IFSC located in the approved multiservice SEZ set up under the
SEZ Act, 2005 read with SEZ Rules, 2006.32

In case of specified IFSC public & IFSC private company word "thirty days" will be
read as "sixty days".33

LABELING OF COMPANY [SUB-SECTION 3]

Every company shall:

a. Paint or affix its name, and the address of its registered office, and keep
       the same painted or affixed, on the outside of every office or place in which
       its business is carried on, in a conspicuous position, in legible letters, and if
       the characters employed are not those of the language/s in general use in
       that locality, then also in the characters of that language/s.

b. Have its name engraved in legible characters on its seal, if any;

c. Get its name, address of its registered office and the Corporate Identity
       Number along with telephone number, fax number, if any, e-mail and website
       addresses, if any, printed in all its business letters, billheads, letter papers and
       in all its notices and other official publications; and

32 G.S.R. 08 (E) dated 4th January, 2017
33 ibid
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.57
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

d. Have its name printed on hundies, promissory notes, bills of exchange and
       such other documents as may be prescribed:

Note:
Where a company has changed its name(s) during the last two years, it shall
paint or affix or print, both or all such names in case of point a as well as c above.

In case of One person company, the words ``One Person Company'' shall be
mentioned in brackets below the name of such company, wherever its name is
printed, affixed or engraved.

NOTICE OF CHANGE & VERIFICATION TO REGISTRAR [SUB-SECTION 4]

Notice of every change of the situation of the registered office after the date of
incorporation of the company, verified in the Form No. INC-22, along with fee as
prescribed shall be given to the Registrar within 30 days of the change, who shall
record the same.

In case of specified IFSC public & IFSC private company word "thirty days" will be read
as "sixty days".34

APPROVAL/CONFIRMATION OF CHANGE [SUB-SETION 5]

Change by passing of special resolution

The registered office of the company shall be changed only by passing of special
resolution by a company, outside the local limits of any city, town or village where
such office is situated or where it may be situated later by virtue of a special
resolution passed by the company.

Change of registered office outside the jurisdiction of registrar

Where a company changes the place of its registered office from the jurisdiction of
one Registrar to the jurisdiction of another Registrar within the same State, there
such change is to be confirmed by the Regional Director on an application made
by the company. Application shall be made in Form No. INC-23 along with fee.

34 G.S.R. 08 (E) dated 4th January, 2017
2.58  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

In case of specified IFSC public & IFSC private company Board resolution will sufficient,
provided that such Company shall not change the place of its registered office to any
other place outside the said International Financial Services Centre.35

COMMUNICATION AND FILING OF CONFIRMATION [SUB-SECTION 6]

The confirmation of change of registered office from jurisdiction of one registrar
to another registrar within the same state, shall be:

a. Communicated within 30 days from the date of receipt of application by
       the Regional Director to the company, and

b. The company shall file the confirmation with the Registrar within a period
       of 60 days of the date of confirmation who shall register the same, and

c. Certify the registration within a period of thirty days from the date of filing
       of such confirmation.

The certificate so issued by Registrar shall be conclusive evidence that all the
requirements of this Act with respect to change of registered office have been
complied with and the change shall take effect from the date of the certificate.
If the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that the company is not carrying
on any business or operations, he may cause a physical verification of the registered
office of the company in such manner as may be prescribed and if any default is
found to be made in complying with the requirements of sub-section (1), he may
without prejudice to the provisions contained in this section regarding the
penalties, initiate action for the removal of the name of the company from the
register of companies under Chapter XVIII.

PENALTIES IN CASE OF DEFAULTS [SUB-SECTION 8]

If any default is made in complying with the requirements of this section, the
company and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of one
thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues but not
exceeding one lakh rupees.

35 G.S.R. 08 (E) dated 4th January, 2017
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.59
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Summary of Provisions applicable in case of change of place of registered
office

                                 Change in Place of Registered office

Within a city  Within a state  Within a State       From One State
    Board        (from one       (From one             to Another
                    city to        ROC to              (Change in
 Resolution       another)        another)
  Notice to                                         Situation Clause)

     ROC         Special         Special              Special
  (30 days)    Resolution      Resolution           resolution
               Notice to
                               Permission           Approval of
                   ROC              of                 Central
                (30 days)
                                Regional            Government
                                Director

                                 30/60/30            60/30
                               RD/Co./ROC           CG/CO.

                               Conclusive           Fresh Certificate
                                Evidence            of Incorporation

    16. COMMENCEMENT OF BUSINESS ETC.
          [SECTION 10A]

CONDITIONS FOR COMMENCEMENT OF BUSINESS

A company incorporated
a. After the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2019

       and
b. Having a share capital
Shall commence any business or exercise any borrowing powers only if;
a. The company has filed with the Registrar a verification of its registered

       office as provided in sub-section (2) of section 12, and
             2.60  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

b. A declaration is filed with the Registrar, by a director, within a period of 180
       days of the date of incorporation of the company, in Form No. INC- 20A, duly
       verified by a Company Secretary or a Chartered Accountant or a Cost
       Accountant, in practice, along with prescribed fee; that every subscriber to
       the memorandum has paid the value of the shares agreed to be taken by
       him on the date of making of such declaration

Note:

1. Section 12(2) i.e. Verification of registered office with registrar, discussed earlier
heading i.e. 15 in this chapter.

2. In the case of a company pursuing objects requiring registration or approval from
any sectoral regulators such as the Reserve Bank of India, Securities and Exchange
Board of India, etc., the registration or approval, as the case may be from such
regulator shall also be obtained and attached with the declaration.

OUTCOME WHERE CONDITIONS ARE NOT SATISFIED

Penalty

If any default is made in complying with the requirements of this section, the
penalty shall be:

  Liable           Quantum of penalty
Company            Fifty thousand rupee

Every        One thousand rupees for each day during which such default
officer who  continues but not exceeding an amount of one lakh rupees.
is in
default

Declaration not filled by director within 180 days

Where no declaration has been filed by directors within a period of 180 days of the
date of incorporation with the Registrar and the Registrar has reasonable cause to
believe that the company is not carrying on any business or operations, he may
initiate action for the removal of the name of the company from the register of
companies under Chapter XVIII.

Note: Action by Registrar for removal of name can be take place simultaneously
with levy of penalty.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.61
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

    17. CONVERSION OF COMPANIES ALREADY
          REGISTERED [SECTION 18]

Section 18 of the Act, empower a company to convert itself into some other class
of company by altering its memorandum and articles of association.

Following is the law with respect to the conversion of the companies already
registered.

BY ALTERATION OF MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES

A company of any class registered under this Act may convert itself as a company
of other class under this Act by alteration of memorandum and articles of the
company in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

FILE AN APPLICATION TO THE REGISTRAR

Wherever conversion to be done under section 18, Registrar on basis of an
application filled with it by company, shall after satisfying himself that the
provisions applicable for registration of companies have been complied with,

a. Close the former registration of the company; and

b. After registering the required documents, issue a certificate of incorporation in
       the same manner as its first registration.

Students may also refer to: Rule 6, 7, 7A, and 20 to 22 of the Companies
(Incorporation) Rules, 2014 and 37 and 38 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules,
2016 & Form Nos. INC-5 & INC-6 under the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014
and INC-27 under the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2016.

NO EFFECT ON THE DEBTS, LIABILITIES ETC. INCURRED BEFORE
CONVERSION

The registration of a company under this section shall not affect any debts,
liabilities, obligations or contracts incurred or entered into, by or on behalf of the
company before conversion and such debts, liabilities, obligations and contracts
may be enforced in the manner as if such registration had not been done.

To put in more simple way, the company remains the same entity as it was before
in respect of its debts and liabilities, obligations or contracts.
2.62  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

    18. SUBSIDIARY COMPANY NOT TO HOLD
          SHARES IN ITS HOLDING COMPANY
          [SECTION 19]

As per section 19 of the Act, a subsidiary company is not allowed to hold shares of
its holding company. The prohibition also extends up to the nominees of the
subsidiary company.

Consequently, any allotment or transfer of shares in a holding company to its
subsidiary shall be void. If the holding company is a guarantee or unlimited
company, not having a share capital the above restriction will apply on holding the
interest, whatever be the form of interest.

The prohibition does not apply to the following cases:

a. Where the subsidiary is concerned as a legal representative of a deceased
       member of the holding company; or

b. Where the subsidiary holds such shares as a trustee; or

c. Where the subsidiary company is a shareholder even before it became a
       subsidiary company of the holding company.

Note:

a. Right to vote at a meeting of the holding company only in respect of the
       shares held by it as a legal representative or as a trustee

b. The prohibition does not apply to the case of a subsidiary company which
       already had shares in its holding company at the commencement of the Act

c. A subsidiary can buy shares in its holding company where it is a part of a
       scheme of amalgamation sanctioned by the court/tribunal.36

Example - RPIP Ltd. has invested 51% in the shares of SSP Pvt. Ltd. on 31st March
2023. SSP Pvt. Ltd. have been holding 2% equity of RPIP Ltd. since 2013. SSP Pvt.
Ltd. cannot increase its equity beyond that 2% on or after 31st March 2023.
However, it could continue to hold or reduce its initial 2% stake.

36 Himachal Telematics Ltd v Himachal Futuristic Communications Ltd, (1996) 37 DRJ 476
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.63
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

    19. SERVICE OF DOCUMENTS [SECTION 20]

Section 20 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Rule 35 (Service of Documents) of
Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014, provides the mode in which documents may
be served on the company, on the members and also on the registrars. Law with
respect to the service of documents is as follows-

SERVING OF DOCUMENT TO COMPANY OR AN OFFICER THEREOF

A document may be served on a company or an officer thereof by sending it to the
company or the officer at the registered office of the company by-

a. registered post, or
b. speed post, or
c. courier service, or
d. leaving it at its registered office, or
e. means of such electronic or other mode as may be prescribed

However, where securities are held with a depository, the records of the beneficial
ownership may be served by such depository on the company by means of
electronic or other mode.

SERVING OF DOCUMENT TO REGISTRAR OR MEMBERS

Save as provided in this Act or the rules made thereunder for filing of documents
with the Registrar in electronic mode, a document may be served on Registrar or
any member by sending it to him by:

a. Post, or
b. registered post, or
c. speed post, or
d. courier, or
e. by delivering at his office or address, or
f. by such electronic or other mode as may be prescribed.
However, a member may request for delivery of any document through a particular
mode, for which he shall pay such fees as may be determined by the company in
its annual general meeting.
2.64  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

For the purposes of this section, the term "courier" means a person or agency which
delivers the document and provides proof of its delivery.

The term "electronic transmission" means a communication that creates a record
that is capable of retention, retrieval (recovery) and review, and which may
thereafter be rendered into clearly legible tangible form. It may be made by

 Facsimile telecommunication (fax) or electronic mail (email), which the
       company or the officer has provided from time to time for sending
       communications,

 Posting of an electronic message board or network that the Registrar or the
       member has designated for those communications, and which transmission
       shall be validly delivered upon the posting, or

 Other means of electronic communication, in respect of which the company
       or the officer has put in place reasonable systems to verify that the sender is
       the person purporting to send the transmission.

Further sub-section 2 provides, in case of delivery by post, such service shall be
deemed to have been effected:

a. In the case of a notice of a meeting, at the expiration of 48 hours after the
       letter containing the same is posted; and

b. In any other case, at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the
       ordinary course of post.

Section 20 (2) shall apply to a Nidhi Company, subject to the modification; that

a. The document may be served only on members who hold shares of more
       than ` 1,000 in face value or more than 1% of the total paid-up share capital;
       whichever is less.

b. For other shareholders, document may be served by a public notice in
       newspaper circulated in the district where the Registered Office of the Nidhi
       is situated; and publication of the same on the notice board of the Nidhi.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.65
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Example ­ Modern Furniture sent the notice of general meeting through postal
mail 48 hours after the post of letter containing such notice, shall be deemed to be
served. Hence, requirement of 21 clear days' notice under section 101 of the Act, if
seen in this context, Modern Furniture Limited should have posted the letter
containing notice 23 days prior to meeting day (48 hours of post-delivery+21 clear
days).

20. AUTHENTICATION  OF                              DOCUMENTS,

PROCEEDINGS AND CONTRACTS [SECTION 21]

As per section 21 of the Act:
a. A document or proceeding requiring authentication by a company or
b. Contracts made by or on behalf of a company
May be signed by:
a. Any key managerial personnel37, or
b. An officer or employee of the company duly authorized by the Board in this

       behalf.

In the case of specified IFSC public company and IFSC private company, for the
word "An officer" read as "An officer or any other person".38

    21. EXECUTION OF BILLS OF EXCHANGE, ETC.
          [SECTION 22]

Sub-section 1 provides, a bill of exchange, hundi or promissory note shall be
deemed to have been made, accepted, drawn or endorsed on behalf of a
company if made, accepted, drawn, or endorsed in the name of, or on behalf of
or on account of, the company by any person acting under its authority.
Authority can be either express or implied.

37 Who all are included in key managerial person under section 2 (51) already discussed in

chapter 1 of this module
38 G.S.R. 08 (E) dated 4th January, 2017
2.66            CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Formal deeds can be executed only through a power of attorney. Therefore sub-
section 2 and 3 together provides;
a. A company may, by writing under

        Its common seal, if any,
        Where in case a company does not have a common seal, then

               authorized by 2 directors or by a director and the Company Secretary,
               wherever the company has appointed a Company Secretary.
b. Authorize any person,
c. Either generally or in respect of any specified matters,
d. As its attorney to execute other deeds on its behalf
e. In any place either in or outside India.
f. Deed signed by such an attorney on behalf of the company and under his
       seal shall bind the company.
Summary of sub-section 2

                                           Co. having
                                         common seal

Yes                               No

*In writing authorise any person  Authorisation
 (generally or in respect of any  shall be made
 specified matters) as attorney
                                         by:

  In India, or  2 directors, or   Where the Co. has a
outside India.                    Company Secretary

                                            A director
                                            alongwith
                                      Company Secretary
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.67
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

Note: It can be observed from above that a company may or may not have a
common seal. If company decides to have a common seal then it has to affix the
same for specified matters, execution of deeds on behalf of the company.

The seal is a method of making a physical impression upon the documents of the
company, of its name, etc.

Section 22 comes into play when a person wants to enforce obligations against a
company arising out of a contract and the company denies the contract or disputes
its liability. The section cannot be used where the proceeding is by the company.

SUMMARY

 Once an association becomes incorporated it acquires a legal status, it

       becomes a legal entity in its own right, separate from the individual
       members. It will have perpetual succession i.e. not affected by the death,
       insanity, or insolvency of an individual member.

 Earlier, the certificate of incorporation considered as conclusive proof, but

       as per the Companies Act, 2013, certificate of Incorporation is not conclusive
       proof of everything prior to incorporation being in order.

 CIN is a 21 alpha-numeric digit based unique identification number,

       comprising data sections/elements that reveals the basis aspects about
       company

 The memorandum of association (MOA) is the document that sets up the

       company and the articles of association (AOA) set out how the company is
       run, governed and owned. These documents can be altered.

 As per Doctrine of Ultra Vires, acts outside the powers conferred under MOA

       are ultra-vires. Such acts and resulting agreements are void.

 Doctrine of Constructive Notice put onus on those who delas with company

       to be aware of what is stated in MOA and AOA, while Doctrine of Indoor
       Management protects outsider as an exception to earlier specified doctrine.

 A company of any class may convert itself as a company of other class by

       alteration of its MOA and AOA.

 Certain relaxations are provided in case of specified IFSC companies

       working in or from International Financial Services Centre, regarding
       provisions contained in chapter II of the Act.
2.68  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Entrenchment enhance the protection. Modern Furniture Limited, an existing
       private company willing to insert the provisions for entrenchment; it
       (a) Can amend the article by passing an ordinary resolution
       (b) Can amend the article by passing a special resolution
       (c) Can amend the article agreed by all the members
       (d) Can't amend article to made the provisions for entrenchment

2. Today, it's July 2024. Mr. Nilanjan Chattopadhyay a 24 years old Indian youngster,
       who returned back to India in January month of 2024 after completing his
       education in bio-nutrient and willing to form an OPC; but not sure about the
       requirements or pre-conditions regarding eligibility. He read some articles on
       provisions related to OPC and concluded:
       (i) OPC can be formed by Indian Citizen only
       (ii) He can't form OPC because in immediate previous year he was not resident
               in India
       (a) Both the conclusions are valid
       (b) None of the conclusion is valid
       (c) First conclusion is invalid
       (d) Second conclusion is invalid

3. In case of an application for reservation of name or for change of its name by an
       existing company, the Registrar may reserve the name for a period of ................
       from the date of approval
       (a) 90 days
       (b) 60 days
       (c) 30 days
       (d) 20 days
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.69
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

4. Modern Furniture incorporated on 30th June 2022, its directors filled a declaration
       under section 10A (1)(a) regarding receipt of payment i.e. value of share (against
       share subscribed by subscriber) to registrar on 18th April 2023. The company and
       its officers (officers who are in default) shall be charged with penalty of:

       (a) ` 1,11,000 and ` 1,11,000 respectively

       (b) ` 50,000 and ` 1,11,000 respectively

       (c) ` 1,11,000 and ` 50,000 respectively

       (d) ` 50,000 and ` 1,00,000 respectively

5. I.T.C limited changed its name to ITC Limited. Company and officers thereat made
       default by failing to make alteration in every issued copy of memorandums and
       articles. In this context you are required to pick incorrect statements out of
       followings

       (i) Alternation shall be made to every copy of MOA/AOA because these are
               considered as public document.

       (ii) Alternation shall be made to every copy be it in electronic form or otherwise.

       (iii) Penalty shall be rupees one thousand for every copy of the articles issued
               without such alteration.

       (a) (ii) only

       (b) (iii) only

       (c) (ii) and (iii) only

       (d) None of (i), (ii) and (iii)

Descriptive Questions

1. Yadav dairy products Private limited has registered its articles along with
       memorandum at the time of registration of company in December, 2019. Now
       directors of the company are of the view that provisions of articles regarding
       forfeiture of shares should not be changed except by a resolution of 90% majority.
       While as per section 14 of the Companies Act, 2013 articles may be changed by
       passing a special resolution only. One of the directors said that they cannot make
       a provision against the Companies Act. You are required to advise the company
       on this matter.
2.70  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

2. A group of individuals intend to form a club namely 'Budding Pilots Flying Club'
       as limited liability company to impart class room teaching and aircraft flight
       training to trainee pilots. It was decided to form a limited liability company for
       charitable purpose under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 for a period of
       ten years and thereafter the club will be dissolved and the surplus of assets over
       the liabilities, if any, will be distributed amongst the members as a usual
       procedure allowed under the Companies Act.

       Examine the feasibility of the proposal and advise the promoters considering
       the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.

3. Alfa school started imparting education on 1st April, 2010, with the sole
       objective of providing education to children of weaker society either free of cost
       or at a very nominal fee depending upon the financial condition of their
       parents. However, on 30th March 2024, it came to the knowledge of the Central
       Government that the said school was operating by violating the objects of its
       objective clause due to which it was granted the status of a section 8 company
       under the Companies Act, 2013. Describe what powers can be exercised by the
       Central Government against the Alfa School, in such a case?

4. XY Ltd. has its registered office at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra. For
       better administrative conveniences the company wants to shift its registered
       office from Mumbai to Pune (within the State of Maharashtra, but from Mumbai
       ROC to Pune ROC). What formalities the company has to comply with under
       the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 for shifting its registered office as
       stated above? Explain.

5. Anushka security equipments limited is a manufacturer of CCTV cameras. It has
       raised ` 100 crore through public issue of its equity shares for starting one more
       unit of CCTV camera manufacturing. It has utilized 10 crore rupees and then it
       realized that its existing business has no potential for expansion because
       government has reduced customs duty on import of CCTV camera. Hence imported
       cameras from China are cheaper than its own manufacturing. Now it wants to
       utilize remaining amount in mobile app development business by adding a new
       object in its memorandum of association.

       Does the Companies Act allow such change of object? If not, then what advise
       will you give to company. If yes, then give steps to be followed.
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.71
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

6. The object clause of the Memorandum of Vivek Industries Limited., empowers
       it to carry on real-estate business and any other business that is allied to it.
       Due to a downward trend in real-estate business, the management of the
       company has decided to take up the business of Food processing activity. The
       company wants to alter its Memorandum, so as to include the Food Processing
       Business in its objects clause. Examine whether the company can make such
       change as per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013?

7. The persons (not being members) dealing with the company are always
       protected by the doctrine of indoor management. Explain. Also, explain when
       doctrine of Constructive Notice will apply.

8. Manglu and friends got registered a company in the name of Taxmann advisory
       private limited. Taxmann is a registered trademark. After 5 years when the
       owner of trademark came to know about the same, it filed an application with
       relevant authority. Can the company be compelled to change its name by the
       owner of trademark? Can the owner of registered trademark request the
       company and then company changes its name at its discretion?

9. Explain in the light of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, the
       circumstances under which a subsidiary company can become a member of its
       holding company.

10. Shri Laxmi Electricals Ltd. (S) is a company in which Hanuman power suppliers
       Limited (H) is holding 60% of its paid up share capital. One of the shareholder
       of H made a charitable trust and donated his 10% shares in H and ` 50 crore
       to the trust. He appoint S as the trustee. All the assets of the trust are held in
       the name of S. Can a subsidiary hold shares in its holding company in this way?

11. Explain the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 relating to the `Service of
       Documents' on a company and the members of the company.

12. Parag Constructions Limited is a leading infrastructure company. One of the directors
       of the company Mr. Parag has been signing all construction contracts on behalf of
       company for many years. All the parties who ever deal with the company know Mr.
       Parag very well. Company has got a very important construction contract from a
       renowned software company. Parag constructions will do construction for this site in
       partnership with a local contractor Firozbhai. Mr. Parag signed partnership deed with
       Firozbhai on behalf of company because he has an implied authority. Later in a
       dispute company denied to accept liability as a partner. Can the company deny its
       liability as a partner?
    2.72              CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.       (c) Can amend the article agreed by all the members

2.       (d) Second conclusion is invalid

3.       (b) 60 days

4.       (d) ` 50,000 and ` 1,00,000 respectively

5.       (d) None of (i), (ii) and (iii)

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. As per section 5 of the Companies Act, 2013 the article may contain provisions
       for entrenchment to the effect that specified provisions of the articles may be
       altered only if more restrictive conditions than a special resolution, are met.

       The provisions for entrenchment shall only be made either on formation of a
       company, or by an amendment in the articles agreed to by all the members
       of the company in the case of a private company and by a special resolution
       in the case of a public company.

       Where the articles contain provisions for entrenchment, whether made on
       formation or by amendment, the company shall give notice to the Registrar
       of such provisions in prescribed manner.

       In the present case, Yadav dairy products Private Limited is a private company
       and wants to protect provisions of articles regarding forfeiture of shares. It
       means it wants to make entrenchment of articles, which is allowed. But the
       company will have to pass a resolution taking permission of all the members
       and it should also give notice to ROC regarding entrenchment of articles.

2. According to section 8(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, where it is proved to
       the satisfaction of the Central Government that a person or an association of
       persons proposed to be registered under this Act as a limited company--

       (a) has in its objects the promotion of commerce, art, science, sports,
               education, research, social welfare, religion, charity, protection of
               environment or any such other object;
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.73
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

       (b) intends to apply its profits, if any, or other income in promoting its
               objects; and

       (c) intends to prohibit the payment of any dividend to its members;

       the Central Government may, by issue of licence, allow that person or
       association of persons to be registered as a limited liability company.

       In the instant case, the decision of the group of individuals to form a limited
       liability company for charitable purpose under section 8 for a period of ten
       years and thereafter to dissolve the club and to distribute the surplus of assets
       over the liabilities, if any, amongst the members will not hold good, since
       there is a restriction as pointed out in point (b) above regarding application
       of its profits or other income only in promoting its objects.

       Further, there is restriction in the application of the surplus assets of such a
       company in the event of winding up or dissolution of the company as
       provided in sub-section (9) of Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.
       Therefore, the proposal is not feasible.

3. Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 deals with the formation of companies
       which are formed to promote the charitable objects of commerce, art, science,
       education, sports etc. Such company intends to apply its profit in promoting
       its objects. Section 8 companies are registered by the Registrar only when a
       license is issued by the Central Government to them. Since, Alfa School was
       a Section 8 company and it had started violating the objects of its objective
       clause, hence in such a situation the following powers can be exercised by
       the Central Government:

       (i) The Central Government may by order revoke the licence of the
               company where the company contravenes any of the requirements or
               the conditions of this sections subject to which a licence is issued or
               where the affairs of the company are conducted fraudulently, or
               violative of the objects of the company or prejudicial to public interest,
               and on revocation the Registrar shall put `Limited' or `Private Limited'
               against the company's name in the register. But before such revocation,
               the Central Government must give it a written notice of its intention to
               revoke the licence and opportunity to be heard in the matter.
2.74  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ii) Where a licence is revoked, the Central Government may, by order, if it
               is satisfied that it is essential in the public interest, direct that the
               company be wound up under this Act or amalgamated with another
               company registered under this section. However, no such order shall be
               made unless the company is given a reasonable opportunity of being
               heard.

       (iii) Where a licence is revoked and where the Central Government is
               satisfied that it is essential in the public interest that the company
               registered under this section should be amalgamated with another
               company registered under this section and having similar objects, then,
               notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the
               Central Government may, by order, provide for such amalgamation to
               form a single company with such constitution, properties, powers,
               rights, interest, authorities and privileges and with such liabilities, duties
               and obligations as may be specified in the order.

4. The Companies Act, 2013 under section 13 provides for the process of altering
       the Memorandum of a company. Since the location or Registered Office clause
       in the Memorandum only names the state in which its registered office is
       situated, a change in address from Mumbai to Pune, does not result in the
       alteration of the Memorandum and hence the provisions of section 13 (and its
       sub sections) do not apply in this case.

       However, under section 12 (5) of the Act which deals with the registered office
       of company, the change in registered office from one town or city to another
       in the same state, must be approved by a special resolution of the company.

       Further, registered office is shifted from one ROC to another, therefore
       company will have to seek approval of Regional director.

5. According to section 13 of the Companies Act, 2013 a company, which has
       raised money from public through prospectus and still has any unutilised
       amount out of the money so raised, shall not change its objects for which it
       raised the money through prospectus unless a special resolution is passed by
       the company and--

       (i) the details in respect of such resolution shall also be published in the
               newspapers (one in English and one in vernacular language) which is in
               circulation at the place where the registered office of the company is
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.75
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

               situated and shall also be placed on the website of the company, if any,
               indicating therein the justification for such change;

       (ii) the dissenting shareholders shall be given an opportunity to exit by the
               promoters and shareholders having control in accordance with SEBI
               regulations.

       Company will have to file copy of special resolution with ROC and he will
       certify the registration within a period of thirty days. Alteration will be
       effective only after this certificate by ROC.

       Looking at the above provision we can say that company can add the object
       of mobile app development in its memorandum and divert public money into
       that business. But for that it will have to comply with above requirements.

6. Alteration of Objects Clause of Memorandum

       The Companies Act, 2013 has made alteration of the memorandum simpler
       and more flexible. Under section 13(1) of the Act, a company may, by a special
       resolution after complying with the procedure specified in this section, alter
       the provisions of its Memorandum.

       In the case of alteration to the objects clause, section 13(6) requires the filing
       of the Special Resolution by the company with the Registrar. Section 13 (9)
       states that the Registrar shall register any alteration to the Memorandum with
       respect to the objects of the company and certify the registration within a
       period of thirty days from the date of filing of the special resolution by the
       company.

       Section 13 (10) further stipulates that no alteration in the Memorandum shall
       take effect unless it has been registered with the Registrar as above.

       Hence, the Companies Act, 2013 permits any alteration to the objects clause
       with ease. Vivek Industries Limited can make the required changes in the
       object clause of its Memorandum of Association.

7. Doctrine of Indoor Management

       According to this doctrine, persons dealing with the company need not
       inquire whether internal proceedings relating to the contract are followed
       correctly, once they are satisfied that the transaction is in accordance with
       the memorandum and articles of association.
2.76  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Stakeholders need not enquire whether the necessary meeting was convened
       and held properly or whether necessary resolution was passed properly. They
       are entitled to take it for granted that the company had gone through all
       these proceedings in a regular manner.

       The doctrine helps to protect external members from the company and states
       that the people are entitled to presume that internal proceedings are as per
       documents submitted with the Registrar of Companies.

       The doctrine of indoor management is opposite to the doctrine of
       constructive notice. Whereas the doctrine of constructive notice protects a
       company against outsiders, the doctrine of indoor management protects
       outsiders against the actions of a company.

       This doctrine also is a safeguard against the possibility of abusing the
       doctrine of constructive notice.

       Exceptions to Doctrine of Indoor Management (Applicability of doctrine
       of constructive notice)

       (i) Knowledge of irregularity: In case an `outsider' has actual knowledge
               of irregularity within the company, the benefit under the rule of indoor
               management would no longer be available. In fact, he/she may well be
               considered part of the irregularity.

       (ii) Negligence: If with a minimum of effort, the irregularities within a
               company could be discovered, the benefit of the rule of indoor
               management would not apply.

               The protection of the rule is also not available where the circumstances
               surrounding the contract are so suspicious as to invite inquiry, and the
               outsider dealing with the company does not make proper inquiry.

       (iii) Forgery: The rule does not apply where a person relies upon a
               document that turns out to be forged since nothing can validate
               forgery. A company can never be held bound for forgeries committed
               by its officers.

8. According to section 16 of the Companies Act, 2013 if a company is registered
       by a name which,--

       in the opinion of the Central Government, is identical with the name by
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.77
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

               which a company had been previously registered, it may direct the
               company to change its name. Then the company shall by passing an
               ordinary resolution change its name within 3 months.

       is identical with a registered trade mark and owner of that trade mark apply

               to the Central Government within three years of incorporation of
               registration of the company, it may direct the company to change its name.
               Then the company shall change its name by passing an ordinary resolution
               within 6 months.

       Company shall give notice to ROC along with the order of Central
       Government within 15 days of change. In case of default company and
       defaulting officer are punishable.

       In the given case, owner of registered trade-mark is filing objection after 5
       years of registration of company with a wrong name. While it should have filed
       the same within 3 years. Therefore, the company cannot be compelled to
       change its name.

       As per section 13, company can anytime change its name by passing a special
       resolution and taking approval of Central Government. Therefore, if owner of
       registered trademark request the company for change of its name and the
       company accepts the same then it can change its name voluntarily by
       following the provisions of section 13.

9. In accordance with the provisions of Section 19 of the Companies Act, 2013,
       a subsidiary company cannot either by itself or through its nominees hold
       any shares in its holding company and no holding company shall allot or
       transfer its shares to any subsidiary companies. Any such allotment or transfer
       of shares in a company to its subsidiary is void. The section however does not
       apply where:

       (1) the subsidiary company holds shares in its holding company as the legal
               representative of a deceased member of the holding company,

       (2) the subsidiary company holds such shares as a trustee, or

       (3) the subsidiary company was a shareholder in the holding company even
               before it became its subsidiary.

10. According to section 19 of the Companies Act, 2013 a company shall not hold
       any shares in its holding company either by itself or through its nominees.
2.78  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Also, holding company shall not allot or transfer its shares to any of its
       subsidiary companies and any such allotment or transfer of shares of a
       company to its subsidiary company shall be void.

       Following are the exceptions to the above rule;

       (a) Where the subsidiary company holds such shares as the legal
               representative of a deceased member of the holding company; or

       (b) Where the subsidiary company holds such shares as a trustee; or

       (c) Where the subsidiary company is a shareholder even before it became
               a subsidiary company of the holding company, but in this case, it will
               not have a right to vote in the meeting of holding company.

       In the given case, one of the shareholders of holding company has transferred
       his shares in the holding company to a trust where the shares will be held by
       subsidiary company. It means now subsidiary will hold shares in the holding
       company. But it will hold shares in the capacity of a trustee. Therefore, we can
       conclude that in the given situation S can hold shares in H.

11. Under section 20 of the Companies Act, 2013 a document may be served on
       a company or an officer thereof by sending it to the company or the officer
       at the registered office of the company by registered post or by speed post
       or by courier service or by leaving it at its registered office or by means of
       such electronic or other mode as may be prescribed. However, in case where
       securities are held with a depository, the records of the beneficial ownership
       may be served by such depository on the company by means of electronic or
       other mode.

       Under section 20 (2), save as provided in the Act or the rule thereunder for
       filing of documents with the registrar in electronic mode, a document may be
       served on Registrar or any member by sending it to him by post or by
       registered post or by speed post or by courier or by delivering at his office or
       address, or by such electronic or other mode as may be prescribed. However,
       a member may request for delivery of any document through a particular
       mode, for which he shall pay such fees as may be determined by the company
       in its annual general meeting.

12. As per section 22 of the Companies Act, 2013 a company may authorise any
       person as its attorney to execute deeds on its behalf in any place either in or
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY & MATTERS                  2.79
                                INCIDENTAL THERETO

outside India. But common seal should be affixed on his authority letter or
the authority letter should be signed by two directors of the company or it
should be signed by one director and secretary. This authority may be either
general for any deeds or it may be for any specific deed.

A deed signed by such an attorney on behalf of the company and under his
seal shall bind the company as if it were made under its common seal.

In the present case company has not neither given any written authority not
affixed common seal of the authority letter.

It means that Mr. Parag is not legally entitled to execute deeds on behalf of
the company. Therefore, deeds executed by him are not binding on the
company. Therefore, company can deny its liability as a partner.
