CHAPTER  10

AUDIT AND AUDITORS

                                      LEARNING OUTCOMES

 At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
  Comprehend the procedure for appointment of auditors,

       their removal, resignation, eligibility, qualifications,
       disqualifications and remuneration.
  Identify the powers and duties of auditors.
  Explain about auditing services and certain services which an
       auditor cannot render.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  10.2  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

   

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

This chapter explains the provisions of Chapter X of the Companies Act, 2013
(hereinafter also referred to as "the Act" or "this Act"), consisting of sections 139 to
148 dealing with the Audit and Auditors. The provisions contained in chapter X of
the Act are supplemented by the Companies (Audit and Auditors) Rules, 2014.

The relevant aspects (and arrangement of sections) to be covered in this book
chapter are presented below:

                  Appointment* of Auditors (Section 139)       First Auditor
                                                          Subsequent Auditor

                  Removal, resignation of auditor and giving of special notice (Section 140)

                  Eligibility, Qualification & Disqualification (Section 141)

Audit & Auditors        Remuneration of Auditor (Section 142)

                  Powers & Duties of auditors and auditing standards (Section 143)

                        Segment of Audit Reports

                        Prohibited Services (Section 144)

                        Signing of Audit Reports (Section 145)

                        Auditor to attend AGM (Section 146)

                        Punishment Provisions (Section 147)

                        Cost Auditor (Section 148)

* Appointment includes re-appointment

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.3

     1. INTRODUCTION

   Chapter X Consists of sections 139 to 148 as well as the Companies
                      (Audit and Auditors) Rules, 2014.

Large business corporations are managed by the directors who represent the members
who are the real owners of the company through board. In the absence of any check,
the directors may mismanage the finances of the organisation. Thus, members appoint
auditor/auditors to look into the true and fair view of the financial affairs of the
company. Large business corporations are managed by the directors, who act as
fiduciaries (a person who prudently takes care of finances or other assets for another
person) to the members (the real owners). This is the reason that the board of directors
is responsible for the preparation of the financial statement and laying it out at the
general meeting of members.

Despite assuming a fiduciary role, in the absence of proper checks and balances, the
directors may indulge in mismanagement of the finances and other assets of the
corporation. Hence, financial statements prepared and laid down by the board need
to be audited by an independent auditor.

Thus, members appoint auditors to have an independent professional opinion on the
financial affairs of the company, who examine such financial statements to frame
opinion to report; whether they reflect a true and fair view of financial position and
performance or not.

     2. APPOINTMENT1 OF AUDITORS [SECTION 139]

APPOINTMENT OF AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 1 READ WITH RULE 3
AND 4 OF THE COMPANIES (AUDIT AND AUDITORS) RULES, 2014]

Who can be appointed as Auditor and when?

Every company shall appoint an individual or a firm ("firm" shall
include a limited liability partnership incorporated under the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008) as an auditor of the company at the first
Annual General Meeting (AGM).

1 Appointment includes re-appointment

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           10.4               CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Tenor of appointment as Auditor                    conclusion        conclusion
                                                   of 1stAGM          of its 6th
The auditor shall hold office from the
conclusion of 1stAGM (or the AGM in which                               AGM

he is appointed) till the conclusion of its 6th

AGM (and thereafter till the conclusion of                     till

every sixth AGM).

Example 1: Rashail Tech Labs Private Limited was incorporated during the financial
year 2023-24. First AGM of the company held on 30.09.2024. The company
appointed M/s. Rams & Associates, Chartered Accountant firm for the period of 5
Years as a subsequent statutory auditor.

Manner and procedure of selection and appointment of auditors [Rule 3 of
the Companies (Audit and Auditors) Rules, 2014]

The manner and procedure of selection of auditors by the members of the company
at AGM has been prescribed under the Rule 3 of the Companies (Audit and Auditors)
Rules, 2014; tabled and stated below.

Categories of Competent Responsibility of the competent authority

   Companies       authority

A      company         Audit   The competent authority shall take into
                   Committee*  consideration the qualifications and
which         is               experience of the individual or the firm
                     Board of  proposed to be considered for appointment as
required to         Directors  auditor and such qualifications and experience
                               are commensurate with the size and requirements
constitute an                  of the company.

Audit                          It shall have regard to any order or pending
                               proceeding relating to professional matters of
Committee                      conduct against the proposed auditor before the
                               Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)
under section                  or any competent authority or any Court.

177                            It may call for such other information from the
                               proposed auditor as it may deem fit.
A      Company

which is not

required to

constitute an

Audit

Committee

under section

177

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS  10.5

* Where competent authority is audit committee, the committee shall
recommend the name of an individual or a firm as auditor to the Board for
consideration; the Board shall consider and recommend an individual or a firm as
auditor to the members in the AGM for appointment.

If the Board agrees with the recommendation of the Audit Committee - It shall
further recommend the appointment of an individual or a firm as auditor to the
members in the annual general meeting.

If the Board disagrees with the recommendation of the Audit Committee - It shall
refer back the recommendation to the committee for reconsideration citing reasons
for such disagreement.

Example 2: Audit Committee recommended KPM & Associates, Chartered
Accountants firm for appointment as statutory auditor to the board of Surya Solar
Limited. However, board of the company disagreed with the recommendation of
the audit committee. In such condition, board shall refer back the recommendation
to the committee for reconsideration citing reasons for such disagreement.

If the Audit Committee, after considering the reasons given by the Board, decides
not to reconsider its original recommendation, the Board shall record reasons for
its disagreement with the committee and send its own recommendation for
consideration of the members in the AGM; and if the Board agrees with the
recommendations of the Audit Committee, it shall place the matter for
consideration by members in the AGM.

Note:

Companies that require to constitute an audit committee

Section 1772 of the Act, read with Companies (Meetings of Board and its Powers)
Rules, 2014 provides Audit Committee shall be constituted by Board of directors in
case of:

i. Every listed public companies and

ii. Those public companies which having:

a. Paid up capital of ten crore rupees or more; or

b. Turnover of one hundred crore rupees or more; or

2 Not a part of syllabus at Intermediate level, but necessary to build understanding of the students.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

c. Aggregate, outstanding loans or borrowings or debentures or deposits
       exceeding fifty crore rupees or more.

The paid up share capital or turnover or outstanding loans, or borrowings or
debentures or deposits, as the case may be, as existing on the date of last audited
financial statements shall be taken into account for the purposes of this rule.

It is also worth noting that where a company ceases to fulfil any of three conditions
laid down above for three consecutive years, it shall not be required to comply with
the provisions pertaining to audit committee until such time as it meets any of such
conditions.

Consent of auditors (proposed/selected auditor) for appointment, certificate
from such auditor and notice to Registrar [Sub-section 1 read with rule 4 of
the Companies (Audit and Auditors) Rules, 2014]

Written consent

Before the appointment is made, the written consent of the auditor to such
appointment shall be obtained.

Certificate

A certificate shall be also obtained from the auditor stating that:

a. The individual or the firm (as the case may be to be, appointed as auditor) is
       eligible for appointment and is not disqualified for appointment under the
       Act, the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and the rules or regulations made
       thereunder;

b. The proposed appointment is as per the term provided under the Act;

c. The proposed appointment is within the limits laid down by or under the
       authority of the Act;

d. The list of proceedings against the auditor or audit firm or any partner of the
       audit firm pending with respect to professional matters of conduct, as
       disclosed in the certificate, is true and correct.

Note

The certificate shall also indicate whether the auditor satisfies the criteria provided
in section 141 [i.e. eligibility, qualification and disqualification of Auditor which will
be discussed later] of this Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.7

Notice to Registrar

The company shall inform the concerned auditor of his or its appointment, and also
file a notice in the Form ADT-1 of such appointment with the Registrar within 15 days
of the meeting in which the auditor is appointed.

Students are advised to take note

Intimation to NFRA under the National Financial Reporting Authority Rules,
2018 (here-in-after referred as to NFRA Rules)

As per Rule 3(2) of NFRA Rules, every existing body corporate other than a company
governed by NFRA rules, shall inform the National Financial Reporting Authority
(NFRA) within 30 days of the commencement of the NFRA rules, in Form NFRA-1,
the particulars of the auditor as on the date of commencement of the NFRA rules.

According to Rule 3(3) of NFRA Rules, every body corporate, other than a company
as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the Act, formed in India and governed under
NFRA Rules shall, within 15 days of appointment of an auditor under sub-section
(1) of section 139, inform the NFRA in Form NFRA-1, the particulars of the auditor
appointed by such body corporate, provided that a body corporate governed under
clause (e) of sub-rule (1) of NFRA Rules shall provide details of appointment of its
auditor in Form NFRA-1.

TERM OF AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 2 READ WITH RULE 5 OF
COMPANIES (AUDIT & AUDITORS) RULES, 2014]

Maximum terms and length thereof in case of individual and firm

Section 139(2) provides that:

i. Listed companies and

ii. All companies (excluding one person companies & small companies), which
       are

       a. Unlisted public companies and having paid up share capital of rupees
               ten crore or more;

       b. Private limited companies and having paid up share capital of rupees
               fifty crore or more;

       c. Having public borrowings from financial institutions, banks or public
               deposits of rupees fifty crore or more.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Shall not appoint or re-appoint

i. An individual as auditor for more than one term of five consecutive years;

ii. An audit firm as auditor for more than two terms of five consecutive years.

Students are advice to take note:

Noting contained in sub-section 2, shall prejudice the right of the:

a. Company to remove an auditor or

b. Auditor to resign from such office of the company.

Example 3: XYZ Ltd. which is a listed company appoints individual Mr. Raghav as
an auditor in its AGM dated 29th September, 2022. Mr. Raghav will hold office of
Auditor from the conclusion of this meeting upto conclusion of sixth AGM i.e. AGM
to be held in the year 2027. Now as per sub-section (2), Mr. Raghav shall not be re-
appointed as Auditor in XYZ Ltd at 6th AGM (i.e. 2027).

Example 4: XYZ Ltd. which is a listed company appoints M/s Raghav & Associates
as an audit firm in its AGM dated 29th September, 2016. M/s Raghav & Associates
will hold office from the conclusion of this meeting upto conclusion of sixth AGM
to be held in the year 2021. Now as per sub-section (2), M/s Raghav & Associates
can be appointed or re-appointed as auditor for one more term of five years i.e.
upto year 2026. It shall not be re-appointed as Audit firm in XYZ Ltd at 11th AGM
(i.e. 2026).

Cooling Period (to ensure re-instatement of independence)

An individual auditor who has completed his term (i.e. one term of five
consecutive years) shall not be eligible for re-appointment as auditor in the same
company for five years from the completion of his term;

An audit firm which has completed its terms (i.e. two terms of five consecutive
years) shall not be eligible for re-appointment as auditor in the same company
for five years from the completion of second term.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         AUDIT AND AUDITORS                        10.9

Summary

Auditor  Appointed/Reappointed                     Not eligible for re-appointment
                        for

Individual One term of five consecutive For five years from the completion
                years (1st AGM to 6th AGM) of his term (till 11th AGM)

Firm     Two terms of five consecutive For five years from the completion
         years (1st AGM to 11th AGM) of its second term (till 16th AGM)

Example 5: XYZ Ltd. which is a listed company appoints individual Mr. Raghav as
an auditor in its AGM dated 29th September, 2016. Mr. Raghav will hold office of
Auditor from the conclusion of this meeting upto conclusion of sixth AGM i.e. AGM
to be held in the year 2021. Now as per sub-section (2), Mr. Raghav shall not be re-
appointed as Auditor in XYZ Ltd. for further term of five years i.e. he cannot be
appointed as Auditor in XYZ Ltd. upto year 2026.

Example 6: XYZ Ltd. which is a listed company appoints M/s Raghav & Associates
as an audit firm in its AGM dated 29th September, 2016. M/s Raghav & Associates
will hold office from the conclusion of this meeting upto conclusion of sixth AGM
to be held in the year 2021. Now as per sub-section (2), M/s Raghav & Associates
can be appointed or re-appointed as auditor for one more term of five years i.e.
upto year 2026. It shall not be re-appointed as Audit firm in XYZ Ltd. for further
term of five years after year 2026 to year 2031.

Note: On the date of appointment, an audit firm shall not have any partner or
partners who are/were also the partner/s to the other audit firm, whose tenure has
been expired in a company immediately preceding the financial year.

It means, the audit firm with common partner/s shall not be appointed as
succeeding auditor of same company after two terms of five consecutive years.

Example 7: M/s Krishna & Associates is an audit firm having 2 partners namely Mr.
Krishna and Mr. Shyam. Mr. Shyam is also a partner of another audit firm named
M/s Kukreja & Associates. M/s Krishna & Associates was appointed as the auditors
in the company Golden Smith Ltd. for two consecutive periods of 5 years i.e. from
year 2016 to year 2026. Now, if Golden Smith Ltd. wants to appoint M/s Kukreja &
Associates as its audit firm, it cannot do so because Mr. Shyam is the common
partner between both the Audit firms. This prohibition is only for 5 years i.e. upto

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

year 2031. After cooling period of 5 years, Golden Smith Ltd. may appoint M/s
Kukreja & Associates or M/s. Krishna & Associates as its auditors.

Transitional period

Every company, existing on or before the commencement of this Act which is required
to comply with the provisions as mentioned in above mentioned points (a) to (d) (i.e.
provisions of this sub-section), shall comply with those provisions within a period
which shall not be later than the date of the first AGM of the company held, within the
period specified under sub-section (1) of section 96, after three years from the date of
commencement of this Act.

ROTATION OF AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 3 AND 4 READ WITH RULE 6
OF COMPANIES (AUDIT & AUDITORS) RULES, 2014]

Power to Members [Sub-section 3]

Members of a company may resolve to provide that:

a. In the audit firm appointed by them, the auditing partner and his team shall
       be rotated at such intervals as may be resolved by members; or

b. The audit shall be conducted by more than one auditor.

Manner of rotation of auditors by the companies on expiry of their term [Sub-
section 4 read with Rule 6 (2) and (3)]

The Central Government may, by rules, prescribe the manner in which the
companies shall rotate their auditors. The manner of rotation of auditors by the
companies on expiry of their term as provided under Rule 6 of the Companies (Audit
and Auditors) Rules, 2014, as stated below:

a. Where a company is required to constitute an Audit Committee

       i. Such Audit Committee shall recommend to the Board, the name of an
               individual auditor or of an audit firm who may replace the
               incumbent auditor on expiry of the term of such incumbent

       ii. The Board shall consider the recommendation of such committee,
               and make its recommendation for appointment of the next auditor by
               the members in annual general meeting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                              10.11

b. In other cases, the Board shall itself consider the matter of rotation of
       auditors and make its recommendation for appointment of the next auditor
       by the members in annual general meeting.

Note

Most of provisions of Rule 6 are either complementary, or in confirmation/ conformance
to Rule 3.

In case where Audit committee is not required to be constituted under section 177, but
constituted by the company voluntarily, then such audit committee shall recommend to
the Board, the name of an individual auditor or of an audit firm who may replace
the incumbent auditor on expiry of the term of such incumbent; but in such cases
board may or may not consider the recommendation of such committee.

Manner of rotation in case of auditors appointed prior to commencement of
this Act and continuing after such commencement [Rule 6(3)]

For the purpose of the rotation of auditors in case of an auditor (whether an
individual or audit firm), the period for which the individual or the firm has held office
as auditor prior to the commencement of the Act shall be taken into account for
calculating the period of five consecutive years or ten consecutive years, as the case
may be.

Example 8: Dass & Dass Co, a Chartered Accountants firm was appointed as auditor
of Modern Furniture since 28th September 2012. The firm can continue to assume the
office of auditor till AGM conducted for financial year 2021-22.

Illustration explaining rotation in case of individual auditor

Number of consecutive years for   Maximum number of                Aggregate period
which an individual auditor has                                    which the auditor
been functioning as auditor in    consecutive years for            would complete in
the same company [till the first                                   the same company
AGM held after the                which he may be                  in view of column I
commencement of provisions of                                      and II
section 139(2)]                   appointed in the same

                                  company              (including

                                  transitional period)

I                                                  II                     III

5 years (or more than 5 years)                     3 years         8 years or more

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       10.12               CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       4 years                                     3 years                7 years
       3 years                                     3 years                6 years
       2 years                                     3 years                5 years
       1 year                                      4 years                5 years

Here,

a. Individual auditor shall include other individuals or firms whose name or
       trademark or brand is used by such individual, if any.

b. Consecutive years shall mean all the preceding financial years for which the
       individual auditor has been the auditor until there has been a break by five
       years or more.

Illustration explaining rotation in case of audit firm

Number of consecutive years for   Maximum number of                       Aggregate period
which an audit firm has been                                              which the firm would
functioning as auditor in the     consecutive years for which             complete in the
same company [till the first AGM                                          same company in
held after the commencement       the firm may be appointed               view of column I and
of provisions of section 139(2)]                                          II
                                  in the same company

                                  (including                transitional

                                  period)

       I                                           II                     III

10 years (or more than 10                          3 years                13 years or more
             years)

       9 years                                     3 years                12 years

       8 years                                     3 years                11 years

       7 years                                     3 years                10 years

       6 years                                     4 years                10 years

       5 years                                     5 years                10 years

       4 years                                     6 years                10 years

       3 years                                     7 years                10 years

       2 years                                     8 years                10 years

       1 year                                      9 years                10 years

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.13

Here,

a. Audit Firm shall include other firms whose name or trade mark or brand is
       used by the firm or any of its partners.

b. Consecutive years shall mean all the preceding financial years for which the firm
       has been the auditor until there has been a break by five years or more.

Manner of rotation in case of same network and common partner [Rule 6(3)]

The incoming auditor or audit firm shall not be eligible if such auditor or audit firm
is associated with the outgoing auditor or audit firm under the same network of
audit firms. The term same network includes the firms operating or functioning,
hitherto or in future, under the same brand name, trade name or common control.

For the purpose of rotation of auditors, a break (cooling period) in the term for a
continuous period of five years shall be considered as fulfilling the requirement of
rotation. But if a partner (common partner), who is in charge of an audit firm and
also certifies the financial statements of the company, retires from the said firm and
joins another firm of chartered accountants, such other firm shall also be ineligible
to be appointed for a period of five years i.e. cooling period.

Manner of rotation in case of joint auditors [Rule 6(4)]

Where a company has appointed two or more individuals or firms or a combination
thereof as joint auditors, the company may follow the rotation of auditors in such
a manner that both or all of the joint auditors, as the case may be, do not complete
their term in the same year.

Illustration 1

Modern Furniture Limited (MFL), despite not mandated by section 177 of the Act, read
with Companies (Meetings of Board and its Powers) Rules, 2014 to constitute audit
committee; on their own on voluntary basis constitute such audit committee.

Such committee recommend to the Board, the name of an individual auditor or of an
audit firm who may replace the incumbent auditor on expiry of the term of such
incumbent; but board didn't consider the recommendation of such committee. Examine
the legal validity of act of audit committee and board of MFL.

Answer ­ Rule 6(1) read in conjunction with rule 6(2) of the Companies (Audit &
Auditors) Rules, 2014 provides that in case where Audit committee not required to be
constituted under section 177, but constituted by company, then also such audit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

committee shall recommend to the Board, the name of an individual auditor or of an
audit firm who may replace the incumbent auditor on expiry of the term of such
incumbent; but in such cases board may or may not consider the recommendation of
said audit committee.
Hence, act of audit committee and board at MFL is legally valid.

FIRST AUDITORS [SUB-SECTION 6]

The first auditor of a company, other than a Government Company, shall be:
a. Appointed by the Board of directors
b. Within 30 days of the date of registration of the company and
c. The auditor so appointed shall hold office until the conclusion of the first

       AGM.
Illustration 2
Unicorn Steel Private Limited is incorporated as on 02.06.2024, board of directors of
the company held board meeting as on 15.06.2024 to appoint Jain Ajmera &
Associates as a first auditor of the company for a term of 5 years. As per section
139(6) of the Companies Act, 2013, the board shall appoint first director within 30
days from the date of registration of the company. Evaluate the legal validity:

Options
a. Valid
b. Invalid
c. Valid after approval of shareholder in General Meeting
d. Valid only after approval of Central Government
Answer - b
Reason ­ As per section 139(6), the first auditor so appoint by Board of Director
shall hold office until the conclusion of the first AGM.
If the Board fails to exercise its powers i.e. appointment of first auditor, it shall
a. Inform the members of the company and
b. The company may appoint the first auditor within 90 days at an extra ordinary

       general meeting (EGM) and
c. Such auditor shall hold office till the conclusion of the first AGM.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.15

Illustration 3

Managing Director of PQR Limited wanted to appoint Mr. Ganpati, a practicing
Chartered Accountant, as first auditor of company. He himself without consulting the
board, appointed Shri Ganpati as auditor. Evaluate legal validity

Answer - Section 139(6) of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that "the first auditor
or auditors of a company shall be appointed by the Board of directors within 30
days from the date of registration of the company". Hence in the instant case, the
appointment of Mr. Ganpati by the Managing Director himself is invalid due to
violation of Section 139(6) of the Companies Act, 2013.

AUDITOR OF GOVERNMENT COMPANY [SUB-SECTION 5 & 7]

First Auditor [Sub-section 7]

The first auditor is to be appointed by Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(CAG) within 60 days from the date of registration of the company, who shall
hold office till the conclusion of the first annual general meeting; in case of:

i. A Government company or

ii. Any other company owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central
       Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the
       Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments.

Note

If Comptroller and Auditor General of India fails in this respect, the Board is to
appoint the auditor within next 30 days.

Further if the Board also fails to do so, it has to inform the members of the company
who have to make the appointment within 60 days at an extraordinary general
meeting (EGM).

Mind it, even appointed by Board or by embers at EGM, the first auditor shall hold
office till the conclusion of the first annual general meeting

Subsequent Auditor [Sub-section 5]

In respect of financial year, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India shall
appoint a duly qualified auditor within 180 days from the commencement of the
financial year, who shall hold office till conclusion of annual general meeting;
in case of:

a. A Government company or

b. Any other company owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.16  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the
       Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments.

FILLING UP CASUAL VACANCY [SUB-SECTION 8]

Other than company whose accounts are subject to audit by an auditor
appointed by the CAG

The Board may fill any casual vacancy in the office of an auditor within 30 days.
Any auditor appointed in a casual vacancy shall hold office until the conclusion of
the next annual general meeting.

Note

Where such vacancy is caused by the resignation of an auditor, such appointment
shall also be approved by the company at a general meeting convened within
three months of the recommendation of the Board.

Company whose accounts are subject to audit by an auditor appointed by the
CAG

Casual vacancy of an auditor shall be filled by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India within 30 days.

Further, in case the CAG does not fill the vacancy within the said period, the
Board of Directors shall fill the vacancy within next 30 days.

Example 9: Prakash Carriers Limited appointed Mr. Raman as its auditor in the
Annual General Meeting held on 30th September, 2023. Initially, he accepted the
appointment. But he resigned from his office on 31st October, 2023 for personal
reasons. The Board of directors seeks advice for filling up the vacancy by
appointment of Mr. Albert as auditor.

In the present case, as the auditor has resigned, the casual vacancy so created can
be filled up by the Board appointing Mr. Albert. However, the appointment of Mr.
Albert must be approved by the company by passing of an ordinary resolution at a
general meeting of the company which must be convened by the Board within
3 months of the recommendation of the Board. Mr. Albert will be entitled to hold
office till the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.17

RE-APPOINTMENT OF RETIRING AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 9 AND 10]

As per sub-section 9, a retiring auditor may be re-appointed at an AGM if:
a. He is not disqualified for re-appointment;
b. He has not given a notice in writing to the company of his unwillingness to

       be re-appointed; and
c. A special resolution has not been passed at that meeting appointing some

       other auditor or providing expressly that he shall not be re-appointed.
Further as per sub-section 10, where at any AGM, no auditor is appointed or re-
appointed, the existing auditor shall continue to be the auditor of the company.

Note

Even in case of continuation of auditor due to deeming provision of sub-section
10, the conditions specified under sub-section 9 shall be checked.

AUDIT COMMITTEE'S RECOMMENDATION [SUB-SECTION 11]

Sub-section 11 prescribes the confirming provision, that where a company is
required to constitute an Audit Committee under section 177, all appointments,
including the filling of a casual vacancy of an auditor under this section shall be
made after taking into account the recommendations of such committee.

     3. REMOVAL, RESIGNATION OF AUDITOR AND
          GIVING OF SPECIAL NOTICE [SECTION 140]

Section 140 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for removal, resignation of
auditor and giving of special notice. According to this section:
REMOVAL OF AUDITOR BEFORE HIS TERM [SUB-SECTION 1 READ
WITH RULE 7 OF THE COMPANIES (AUDIT & AUDITORS) RULES,
2014]

Manner and Procedure

The auditor appointed under section 139 may be removed from his office before
the expiry of his term only by--

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

a. A special resolution of the company3 and

b. After obtaining the previous approval of the Central Government (powers
       are delegated to Regional Director)4 by making an application in Form ADT-
       2 that shall be accompanied with the prescribed fees as provided for this
       purpose under the Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014.

Note

The application shall be made to the Central Government within 30 days of the
resolution passed by the Board.

The Company shall hold the general meeting within 60 days of receipt of approval of
the Central Government for passing the special resolution.

Example 10: Mr. Suresh, a Chartered Accountant, was appointed by the Board of
Directors of AB Limited as the First Auditor. The company in General Meeting removed
Mr. Suresh without seeking the approval of the Central Government and appointed
Mr. Gupta as an auditor in his place. The first auditor appointed by the Board of
Directors can be removed in accordance with the provision of Section 140(1) of the
Companies Act, 2013. Hence, the removal of the first auditor in this case is invalid. The
company contravened the provision of the Act.

In case of a Specified IFSC public company5 and Specified IFSC private company6,
where, within a period of sixty days from the date of submission of the application
to the Central Government under this sub-section, no decision is communicated by
the Central Government to the company, it would be deemed that the Central
Government has approved the application and the company shall appoint new
auditor at a general meeting convened within three months from the date of expiry of
sixty days period.

3 Basant Ram & Sons v Union of India, (2002) 110 Comp Gas 38 (Del), after approval of the
Central Government, general body approval is necessary to make the removal effective.
4 Vide notification S.O. 4090(E) dated 19th December 2016 (in supersession to notification S.O.
1352(E) dated 21st May 2014)
5 Inserted vide Exemption Notification to specified IFSC Public Companies, GSR 08 (E) dated
04.01.2017
6 Inserted vide Exemption Notification to specified IFSC Private Companies, GSR 09 (E) dated
04.01.2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                     AUDIT AND AUDITORS            10.19

Giving opportunity of being heard (Audi Alteram Partem)

Before taking any action for removal of auditor before the expiry of his term, the auditor
concerned shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

The Latin maxim, `Audi Alteram Partem' is the principle of natural justice where every
person gets a chance of being heard to respond to the charge, evidence or action against
them.

Illustration 4
Special Resolution to remove auditor at general meeting shall be passed within
______________, form the approval from central government.
a. 30 days
b. 1 month
c. 60 days
d. 3 months

Answer - c
Reason ­ Rule 7(3) of the Companies (Audit & Auditors) Rules, 2014 that states the
company shall hold the general meeting within sixty days of receipt of approval of the
Central Government for passing the special resolution.
Summary of steps for removal of auditor

A Special Notice is  A board meeting will be        Application to CG
    received for       held (To decide about       (To be made in ADT-
    Removal of            removal and then         2), within 30 days of
       auditor        authorising the filing of
                                                    Board Resolution
                     application to CG through
                         Board Resolution)

  Auditor shall be    After approval from CG,      Approval of CG
                                                       received
given a reasonable   Special Notice to be sent
  opportunity of     for AGM (within 60 days
    being heard        of receipt of approval)

Passing a Special    Auditor will be
 Resolution on          removed
 removal of the

      auditor

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.20                  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

RESIGNATION BY AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 2 & 3 READ WITH RULE 8
OF COMPANIES (AUDIT AND AUDITORS) RULES, 2014]

File a statement [Sub-section 2 read with rule 8]

If the Auditor has resigned from the company, he shall file a statement in the form
ADT-3 with the company and the Registrar within a period of 30 days from the date
of such resignation.

The auditor shall indicate the reasons and other facts as may be relevant with
regard to his resignation, in the statement.

Statement to CAG in case of Government Company [Sub-section 2]

The auditor shall file such statement with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
(CAG) along with the company and the Registrar indicating the reasons and other facts
as may be relevant with regard to his resignation, in case if he is auditor of:

i. A Government company or

ii. Any other company owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central
       Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the
       Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments.

Summary

      Particulars        In case of Government          In other Cases
                                       Co.
 Form of statement                                            ADT-3
   Time Period for                   ADT-3             Within 30 days of
          filling            Within 30 days of
                                                           resignation
Statement filled with            resignation       Company and Registrar
                       Company, Registrar & CAG

Penalty for contravention [Sub-section 3]

If the auditor does not comply with aforesaid provision of filling statement then;

a. He or it shall be liable to a penalty of ` 50,000 or an amount equal to the
       remuneration of the auditor, whichever is less,

                                                      and

b. In case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of ` 500 for each day
       after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of
       ` 2 lakh.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.21

APPOINTING AUDITOR OTHER THAN THE RETIRING AUDITOR [SUB-
SECTION 4]

Special notice for resolution

If the retiring auditor has not completed a consecutive tenure of 5 years (or 10
years in case of firm, as the case may be), special notice shall be required for a
resolution at an annual general meeting appointing as auditor a person other than
a retiring auditor, or providing expressly that a retiring auditor shall not be re-
appointed.

Copy of special notice to retiring auditor

On receipt of notice of such a resolution, the company shall forthwith send a copy
thereof to the retiring auditor.

Representation of auditor

Where notice is given of such a resolution and the retiring auditor makes with
respect thereto representation in writing to the company (not exceeding a
reasonable length) and requests its notification to members of the company, the
company shall, unless the representation is received by it too late for it to do so,

a. In any notice of the resolution given to members of the company, state the
       fact of the representation having been made; and

b. Send a copy of the representation to every member of the company to
       whom notice of the meeting is sent, whether before or after the receipt of the
       representation by the company.

If a copy of the representation is not sent to members

If a copy of representation is not sent to member as aforesaid,

a. Either because it was received too late or of the company's default, the
       auditor may (without prejudice to his right to be heard orally) require that the
       representation shall be read out at the meeting.

b. A copy of such representation shall be filed with the Registrar.

Second proviso to section 140(4) read with Rule 78 of the National Company Law
Tribunal Rules, 2016, provides, if the Tribunal i.e. NCLT is satisfied:

a. On an application in Form No. NCLT. 1 may be filed by the director on behalf
       of the company or the aggrieved auditor to the Tribunal

b. That the rights conferred by the provisions of section 140 are being abused
       by the auditor,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

c. Then, the copy of the representation need not be sent and the
       representation need not be read out at the meeting.

AUDITOR ACTS IN A FRAUDULENT MANNER OR ABETTED OR
COLLUDED IN ANY FRAUD [SUB-SECTION 5]

Tribunal may order the company to change its auditor/s.

Without prejudice to any action under the provisions of this Act or any other law
for the time being in force, the Tribunal (i.e. NCLT) either on

a. Its own (Suo-moto); or

b. An application (in Form No. NCLT 9) made to it by the Central Government;
       or

c. An application (in Form No. NCLT 9) made to it by any person concerned,

If it is satisfied that the auditor of a company has, whether directly or indirectly,
acted in a fraudulent manner or abetted or colluded in any fraud by, or in
relation to, the company or its directors or officers, it may, by order, direct the
company to change its auditors.

Rule 78(3) of the National Company Law Tribunal Rules, 2016 provides exactly
similar provision to what is stated as first proviso to Sub-section 5 of Section 140,
if the application is made by the Central Government and the Tribunal is satisfied
that any change of the auditor is required, it shall within fifteen days of receipt
of such application make an order that the auditor shall not function as an
auditor and the Central Government may appoint another auditor in his place.

Ineligibility of auditor to be appointed and criminal liability

An auditor, whether individual or firm, against whom final order has been passed
by the Tribunal under section 140, shall:

a. Not be eligible to be appointed as an auditor of any company for a period
       of 5 years from the date of passing of the order and

b. Also be liable for action under section 447 of the Companies Act, 2013.

Note

In case of a firm, the liability shall be of the firm and that of every partner or partners
who acted in a fraudulent manner or abetted or colluded in any fraud by, or in
relation to, the company or its director or officers.

The word "auditor" also includes a firm of auditors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                       AUDIT AND AUDITORS          10.23

Illustration 5

FLP Ltd, engaged in the business of real estate and energy, defaulted on its
borrowings which amounted to thousands of crore. During the year ended 31st March
2024, a fraud was uncovered in respect of various transactions of the company and
it was observed by the Central Government that the auditors of the company were
involved in such fraud. Please suggest what can be the course of action in this case.

Answer - The Central Government may apply to the Tribunal in respect of such
matter highlighting that the auditors miserably failed to fulfill their duties as
auditors of the company. If the Tribunal is satisfied that the auditors were involved
in the fraud with the company, the Tribunal may direct the company to change its
auditors and those auditors shall not be eligible to be appointed as auditor of any
company for 5 years and also liable for action under section 447 of the Companies
Act, 2013.

Summary of Sub-section 5

     NCLT                 suo motu                 If tribunal is satisfied, within
                                                        15 days of receipt of
Satisfied that         on application
Auditor has                 by CG                  application, it shall order that
                                                       he shall not function as
   acted in            on application
 fraudulent            by any person               Auditor and CG may appoint
                                                            another auditor
   manner                concerned

Direct the company to   The removed auditor shall not be eligible to be
  change its auditors  appointed as auditor of any company for 5 years

                                    and liable for action u/s 447

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

4. ELIGIBILITY, QUALIFICATIONS AND

DISQUALIFICATIONS                                  OF  AUDITORS

[SECTION 141]

Section 141 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for eligibility, qualifications and
disqualifications of auditors.

QUALIFICATION OF AN AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 1 AND 2]

Auditor shall be CA in Practice [Sub-section 1]

A person shall be eligible to be appointed as an auditor of a company only if he is
a chartered accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of
the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 who holds a valid certificate of practice under
sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act.

Note

Since section 139 allows a firm also to be appointed as an auditor, hence proviso
to section 141(1) prescribe clearly that only those firms wherein majority of partners
practicing in India, are qualified for appointment by its firm name.

Who shall sign if firm appointed as Auditor [Sub-section 2]

Where a firm including a Limited Liability Partnership is appointed as an auditor of
a company, only the partners who are Chartered Accountants shall be authorized
to act and sign on behalf of the firm.

DISQUALIFICATIONS OF AUDITORS [SUB-SECTION 3 READ WITH
RULE 10 OF COMPANIES (AUDIT AND AUDITORS) RULE, 2014]

Following persons shall not be qualified for appointment as auditor of a
company

a. A body corporate other than a limited liability partnership registered under
       the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008;

b. An officer or employee of the company;

c. A person who is a partner, or who is in the employment, of an officer or
       employee of the company;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.25

       Illustration 6

       Mr. Anil, a Chartered accountant, is a partner of a firm and has been appointed
       as an auditor of Laxman Ltd. in the Annual General Meeting of the company
       held in September 2023 in which he accepted the assignment. Subsequently, in
       January 2024, he offered Bharat, another Chartered Accountant, who is the
       Manager Finance of Laxman Ltd., to join the firm of Anil as a partner.

       Answer

       Section 141(3)(c) of the Companies Act, 2013 prescribes that any person who
       is a partner or in employment of an officer or employee of the company will
       be disqualified to act as an auditor of a company. Sub-section (4) of Section
       141 provides that an auditor who becomes subject, after his appointment, to
       any of the disqualifications specified in sub-sections (3) of Section 141, shall
       be deemed to have vacated his office as an auditor.

       In the present case, Anil is auditor of M/s Laxman Limited and any employee
       of Laxman Limited cannot become the Partner of the firm where Anil is a
       Partner. In case that happens, he/the firm shall be deemed to have vacated
       office of the auditor of M/s Laxman Limited.

d. A person who himself or his partner is holding any security of or interest
       in the company or its subsidiary, or of its holding or associate company or a
       subsidiary of such holding company (i.e. fellow subsidiary) or his relative or
       partner

       Illustration 7

       Mr. Ashish, a practicing Chartered Accountant, is holding securities of XYZ Ltd.
       having face value of ` 900/-. Whether Mr. Ashish is qualified for appointment
       as an Auditor of XYZ Ltd.?

       Answer

       As per section 141 (3)(d) (i) an auditor is disqualified to be appointed as an
       auditor if he, or his partner is holding any security or interest in the company
       or its subsidiary, or of its holding or associate company or a subsidiary of
       such holding company. In the present case, Mr. Ashish is holding security of
       ` 900 in XYZ Ltd, therefore he is not eligible for appointment as an Auditor
       of XYZ Ltd.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.26  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Note ­ In earlier Act i.e. the Companies Act, 1956 the holding securities of
       par value upto the limit of ` 1000 by auditor was not the disqualification
       criteria. Under current Act i.e. the Companies Act, 2013, not a single rupee of
       holding by auditor is allowed.

e. A person whose relative (defined u/s 2(77) is holding any security of or
       interest in the company or its subsidiary, or of its holding or associate
       company or a subsidiary of such holding company (i.e. fellow subsidiary) of
       face value exceeding ` 1,00,000.

       Illustration 8

       "Mr. P" is a practicing Chartered Accountant and "Mr. Q", the relative of "Mr.
       P", is holding securities of "ABC Ltd." having face value of
       ` 90,000/-. Whether "Mr. P" is qualified for being appointed as an auditor of
       "ABC Ltd."?

       Answer

       As per section 141 (3)(d)(i), an auditor is disqualified to be appointed as an
       auditor if he, or his relative or partner holding any security of or interest in
       the company or its subsidiary, or of its holding or associate company or a
       subsidiary of such holding company. Further as per proviso to this Section,
       the relative of the auditor may hold the securities or interest in the company
       of face value not exceeding of ` 1,00,000. In the present case, Mr. Q. (relative
       of Mr. P, an auditor), is having securities of ` 90,000 face value in ABC Ltd.,
       which is as per requirement of proviso to section 141(3)(d)(i). Therefore, Mr.
       P will not be disqualified to be appointed as an auditor of ABC Ltd.

       Though rule 10(1) says, a relative of an auditor may hold securities in the
       company of face value not exceeding rupees one lakh but here rather than a
       literal interpretation, reasonable construction is required. And holding of all
       the relatives together shall be checked against the threshold.

       Further, even if relative of one of the partners of any firm hold securities or
       interests exceeding the threshold then, not only such partner even firm shall
       not be eligible to appointed as auditor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.27

       The threshold condition specified above shall, wherever relevant, be also
       applicable in the case of a company not having share capital or other
       securities.

       If the relative acquires any security or interest above the prescribed threshold
       i.e. ` 1,00,000, the corrective action to maintain the limits as specified above
       shall be taken by the auditor within 60 days of such acquisition or interest.

       Illustration 9

       "BC & Co." is an audit firm having partners "Mr. B" and "Mr. C" and "Mr. A",
       relative of "Mr. C", is holding securities of "MWF Ltd." having face value of
       ` 1,10,000. Whether "BC & Co." is qualified for appointment as auditor of "MWF
       Ltd."?

       Answer

       As per section 141(3)(d)(i) an auditor is disqualified to be appointed as an
       auditor if he, or his relative or partner holding any security of or interest in
       the company or its subsidiary, or of its holding or associate company or a
       subsidiary of such holding company. Further as per proviso to this Section,
       the relative of the auditor may hold the securities or interest in the company
       of face value not exceeding of ` 1,00,000. In the instant case, BC & Co, will be
       disqualified for appointment as an auditor of MWF Ltd as the relative of Mr.
       C i.e. partner of BC & Co., is holding the securities in MWF Ltd which is
       exceeding the limit mentioned in proviso to section 141(3)(d)(i).

f. A person who himself, or whose partner or relative is indebted to the
       company, or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate company or a subsidiary
       of such holding company, in excess of ` 5 Lakh.

g. A person who or whose relative or partner has given a guarantee or
       provided any security in connection with the indebtedness of any third
       person to the company, or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate company
       or a subsidiary of such holding company, in excess of one lakh rupees.

h. A person or a firm who, whether directly or indirectly, has business
       relationship with the company, or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate
       company or subsidiary of such holding company or associate company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       The term "business relationship" shall be construed as any transaction
       entered into for a commercial purpose, but except­

        Commercial transactions which are in the nature of professional
               services permitted to be rendered by an auditor or audit firm under the
               Act and the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and the rules or the
               regulations made under those Acts;

        Commercial transactions which are in the ordinary course of business
               of the company at arm's length price like sale of products or services
               to the auditor as customer by the companies engaged in the business
               of telecommunications, airlines, hospitals, hotels and such other similar
               businesses.

i. A person whose relative is a director or is in the employment of the company
       as a director (as defined u/s 2(34) or key managerial personnel (as defined
       u/s 2(51);

j. A person who is in full time employment elsewhere

k. A person or a partner of a firm holding appointment as its auditor, if such
       persons or partner is at the date of such appointment or reappointment
       holding appointment as auditor of more than 20 companies.

       Note

       While calculating the ceiling limit of 20, the one person companies, small
       companies and private companies having paid-up share capital less than 100
       crore rupees shall be excluded.7

       The exceptions provided above shall be applicable only to those
       Private Companies which has not committed a default in filing its financial
       statements under section 137 of the said Act or annual return under section 92
       of the said Act with the registrar8

       Before appointment is given to any auditor, the company must obtain a
       certificate from him to the effect that the appointment, if made, will not result in
       an excess holding of company audit by the auditor concerned over the limit laid
       down in section141(3)(g) of the Companies Act, 2013.

7 Vide Notification no. G.S.R. 464(E) dated 5th June 2015
8 Vide notification no. G.S.R. 583(E) dated 13th June 2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                 AUDIT AND AUDITORS                 10.29

Illustration 10

"ABC & Co." is an audit firm having partners "Mr. A", "Mr. B" and "Mr. C",
Chartered Accountants. "Mr. A", "Mr. B" and "Mr. C" are holding appointment
as auditors in 4, 6 and 10 companies respectively.

i. Provide the maximum number of audits remaining in the name of "ABC
       & Co."

ii. Provide the maximum number of audits remaining in the name of
       individual partner i.e. Mr. A, Mr. B and Mr. C.

Answer

In the instant case, Mr. A is holding appointment in 4 companies, Mr. B is
having appointment in 6 companies and Mr. C is having appointment in 10
companies. In aggregate all three partners are having 20 audits.

As per section 141(3)(g) of the Companies Act, 2013, a person shall not be
eligible for appointment as an auditor if he is in full time employment
elsewhere or a person or a partner of a firm holding appointment as its
auditor, if such person or partner is at the date of such appointment or
reappointment holding appointment as auditor of more than twenty
companies other than one person companies, dormant companies, small
companies and private companies having paid-up share capital less than
` 100 crore.

As per section 141 (3)(g), this limit of 20 company audits is per person. In the
case of an audit firm having 3 partners, the overall ceiling will be 3 × 20 = 60
companies' audit. Sometimes, a Chartered Accountant may be a partner in a
number of auditing firms. In such a case, all the firms in which he is partner
or proprietor will be together entitled to 20 company audits only on his
account.

Therefore, ABC & Co. can hold appointment as an auditor of 40 more
companies:

Total Number of audits for which the firm would be eligible = 20*3 = 60

Number of audits already taken by all the partners

In their individual capacity = 4+6+10                      = 20

Remaining number of audits available to the firm           = 40

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       With reference to above provisions, an auditor can hold more appointment
       as auditor (i.e. ceiling limit as per section 141(3)(g) - already holding
       appointments as an auditor). Hence

       i. Mr. A can hold: 20 ­ 4 = 16 more audits.

       ii. Mr. B can hold 20 - 6 = 14 more audits and

       iii. Mr. C can hold 20-10 = 10 more audits.

       Note - It has been assumed that the companies given in the question are not
       one person companies, dormant companies, small companies and private
       companies having paid-up share capital less than ` 100 crore.

l. a person who has been convicted by a court of an offence involving fraud and
       a period of 10 years has not elapsed from the date of such conviction;

m. A person who, directly or indirectly, renders any service referred to in section
       144 to the company or its holding company or its subsidiary company.

VACATION OF OFFICE BY AN AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 4]

If a person appointed as an auditor of a company incurs any of the disqualifications
specified in Section 141(3) after his appointment, he shall vacate his office as
Auditor. Such vacation shall be deemed to be a casual vacancy in the office of the
auditor.

     5. REMUNERATION OF AUDITORS [SECTION 142]

Section 142 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for remuneration of auditors.
WHO WILL FIX THE REMUNERATION?

Subsequent auditors
The remuneration of auditors has to be fixed by the company in general meeting
or in such manner as the general meeting may determine.
First Auditor
While the remuneration of first auditor shall be fixed by the board, which appointed
him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.31

INCLUSION AND EXCLUSIONS

Components

a. The remuneration so fixed is, in addition to the fee payable to an auditor to,

                                                  Includes

b. The expenses, if any, incurred by him in connection with the audit of the
       company (i.e. out of pocket expense) and

c. Any facility extended to him.

Exclusion

It is not to include any remuneration paid to him for any other service rendered by
him at the request of the company.

Example 11: SHRD Private Ltd is engaged in the business of software and
consultancy. The company has an annual turnover of ` 2,000 crore but its profit
margins are not very good as compared to the industry standards. For the financial
year ended 31st March 2024, the company proposed appointment of its statutory
auditors at its Board meeting, however, the remuneration was not finalized. The
statutory auditors completed the engagement formalities including the
engagement letter between the company and the auditors and it was decided that
the engagement letter be signed without fee i.e. with the clause that the fee to be
mutually decided. In this situation, engagement letter with such arrangement is
valid.

     6. POWERS AND DUTIES OF AUDITORS AND
          AUDITING STANDARDS [SECTION 143]

POWERS OF AUDITORS [SUB-SECTION 1]

Access to books of account and vouchers

Every auditor of a company shall have a right of access at all times to the books of
accounts and vouchers of the company, whether kept at the registered office of the
company or at any other place.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Entitled to have necessary information and explanation

He shall be entitled to require from the officers of the company such information
and explanations as the auditor may consider necessary for the performance of his
duties as auditor.

Access to record of all its subsidiaries

The auditor of a company which is a holding company shall also have the right of
access to the records of all its subsidiaries and associate companies in so far as it
relates to the consolidation of its financial statements with that of its subsidiaries
and associate companies.

DUTIES OF AUDITORS

Matters of inquiry [Sub-section 1]

The auditor shall inquire into the following matters, namely:

a. Whether loans and advances made by the company on the basis of security
       have been properly secured and whether the terms on which they have been
       made are prejudicial to the interests of the company or its members;

b. Whether transactions of the company which are represented merely by book
       entries are prejudicial to the interests of the company;

c. Where the company not being an investment company or a banking
       company, whether so much of the assets of the company as consist of shares,
       debentures and other securities have been sold at a price less than that at
       which they were purchased by the company;

d. Whether loans and advances made by the company have been shown as
       deposits;

e. Whether personal expenses have been charged to revenue account;

f. Where it is stated in the books and documents of the company that any
       shares have been allotted for cash, whether cash has actually been received
       in respect of such allotment, and if no cash has actually been so received,
       whether the position as stated in the account books and the balance sheet is
       correct, regular and not misleading.

Report to members [Sub-section 2 and 3]

The auditor shall make a report to the members of the company on the following:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.33

a. On the accounts examined by him; and

b. On every financial statements which are required by or under this Act to be
       laid before the company in general meeting; and

Note

The auditor while making the report shall take into account the provisions of the
Act, the accounting and auditing standards and matters which are required to be
included in the audit report under the provisions of this Act or any rules made
thereunder or under any order made under section 143(11).

The auditor shall express his opinion on the accounts and financial statements
examined by him. He shall express an opinion, according to him and to the best of
his information and knowledge, whether the said accounts/financial statements
give a true and fair view of the state of the company's affairs as at the end of its
financial year and profit or loss and cash flow for the year and such other matters
as may be prescribed.

Further, sub-section 3 requires, the auditors' report shall also state:

a. Whether he has sought and obtained all the information and explanations
       which to the best of his knowledge and belief were necessary for the purpose
       of his audit and if not, the details thereof and the effect of such information
       on the financial statements;

b. Whether, in his opinion, proper books of account as required by law have
       been kept by the company so far as appears from his examination of those
       books and proper returns adequate for the purposes of his audit have been
       received from branches not visited by him;

c. Whether the report on the accounts of any branch office of the company
       audited under sub-section (8) by a person other than the company's auditor
       has been sent to him under the proviso to that sub-section and the manner
       in which he has dealt with it in preparing his report;

d. Whether the company's balance sheet and profit and loss account dealt with
       in the report are in agreement with the books of account and returns;

e. Whether, in his opinion, the financial statements comply with the accounting
       standards;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

f. The observations or comments of the auditors on financial transactions or
       matters which have any adverse effect on the functioning of the company;

g. Whether any director is disqualified from being appointed as a director under
       sub section (2) of section 164;

h. Any qualification, reservation or adverse remark relating to the maintenance
       of accounts and other matters connected therewith;

i. Whether the company has adequate internal financial controls with reference
       to financial statements in place and the operating effectiveness of such
       controls;

j. Such other matters as may be prescribed.

       In context of clause j stated above, Rule 11 of the Companies (Audit &
       Auditors) Rules,2014 i.e. Other Matters to be Included in Auditors Report
       requires the auditor's report shall also include their views and comments on
       the following matters, namely:

       (i) Whether the company has disclosed the impact, if any, of pending
               litigations on its financial position in its financial statement;

       (ii) Whether the company has made provision, as required under any law
               or accounting standards, for material foreseeable losses, if any, on long
               term contracts including derivative contracts;

       (iii) Whether there has been any delay in transferring amounts, required to
               be transferred, to the Investor Education and Protection Fund by the
               company.

       (iv) Whether the management has represented that, to the best of it's
               knowledge and belief, other than as disclosed in the notes to the
               accounts, no funds have been:

               1. Advanced or loaned or invested (either from borrowed funds or
                       share premium or any other sources or kind of funds) by the
                       company to or in any other person(s) or entity(ies), including
                       foreign entities ("Intermediaries"), with the understanding,
                       whether recorded in writing or otherwise, that the Intermediary
                       shall, whether, directly or indirectly lend or invest in other persons
                       or entities identified in any manner whatsoever by or on behalf of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.35

                       the company ("Ultimate Beneficiaries") or provide any guarantee,
                       security or the like on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries;

               2. Received by the company from any person(s) or entity(ies),
                       including foreign entities ("Funding Parties"), with the
                       understanding, whether recorded in writing or otherwise, that the
                       company shall, whether, directly or indirectly, lend or invest in
                       other persons or entities identified in any manner whatsoever by
                       or on behalf of the Funding Party ("Ultimate Beneficiaries") or
                       provide any guarantee, security or the like on behalf of the
                       Ultimate Beneficiaries; and

               3. Based on such audit procedures that the auditor has considered
                       reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances, nothing has
                       come to their notice that has caused them to believe that the
                       representations under sub-clause (i) [i.e. pt 1] and (ii) [i.e. pt 2]
                       contain any material mis-statement.

       (v) Whether the dividend declared or paid during the year by the company
               is in compliance with section 123 of the Companies Act, 2013.

       (vi) Whether the company, in respect of financial years commencing on or
               after the 1st April, 2022, has used such accounting software for
               maintaining its books of account which has a feature of recording audit
               trail (edit log) facility and the same has been operated throughout the
               year for all transactions recorded in the software and the audit trail
               feature has not been tampered with and the audit trail has been
               preserved by the company as per the statutory requirements for record
               retention.

Note

As per sub-section 4 to section 143, where any of the matters is answered in the
negative or with a qualification, the auditor's report shall state the reason for the
same.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Clause (i) of Sub-Section (3) of Section 143 (i.e. Whether the company has adequate
internal financial controls with reference to financial statements in place and the
operating effectiveness of such controls) shall not apply9 to a private company,

i. which is a one person company or a small company; or

ii. Which has turnover less than rupees fifty crore as per latest audited
financial statement and which has aggregate borrowings from banks or financial
institutions or anybody corporate at any point of time during the financial year less
than rupees 25 crore.

The aforesaid exceptions, modifications and adaptations shall be applicable to a
Private company which has not committed a default in filing of its financial
statements under section 137 or annual return under section 92 of the said Act with
the Registrar.

Illustration 11

MNO Ltd. is a listed company engaged in the business of trading of various products.
The company also plans to start manufacturing of certain products which are
currently traded.

During the course of its audit, the auditors completed all the procedures related to
audit of financial statements. However, the auditor got stuck on one procedure
because of which audit has not got concluded.

Auditors are waiting for certain additional information­ Directors report and
Management Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) for their review. However, the
management is not ready with this information and wants the auditors to complete
their work without review of this information. Please advise as per the legal
requirements.

Answer

In the given case, the requirement of the auditors regarding additional information
i.e. Directors report and MD&A without which they have not been able to conclude
the audit doesn't look valid. The auditor is required to audit the financial statements
and express an opinion on the same. The auditor does not audit these additional
information.

9 Inserted Vide Exemption Notification No. G.S.R. 583(E) Dated 13th June, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.37

Hence the auditor should conclude the work without delaying because of this
additional information.

Compliance with auditing standards [Sub-section 9 and 10]

Every auditor shall comply with the auditing standards.

The Central Government may prescribe the standards of auditing or any addendum
thereto, as recommended by the ICAI, in consultation with and after examination
of the recommendations made by the National Financial Reporting Authority
(NFRA).

It is further provided that until any auditing standards are notified, any standard or
standards of auditing specified by the ICAI shall be deemed to be the auditing
standards.

Additional matters to be reported in case of specified companies [Sub-section 11]

In respect of such class or description of companies, as may be specified in the
general or special order by the Central Government, may in consultation with the
NFRA direct, the auditor's report shall also include a statement on such matters as
may be specified therein.

Note

CARO 2020 issued by MCA should be complied by the statutory auditor of every
company, on which it applies.

REPORTING OF FRAUDS BY AUDITORS [SUB-SECTION 12, 13 AND 15
READ WITH RULE 13 OF THE COMPANIES (AUDIT AND AUDITORS)
RULES, 2014]

Fraud involving amount of one crore or more [Sub-section 12 read with Rule
13(2)]
Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if an auditor of a company, in
the course of the performance of his duties as auditor,
a. Has reason to believe that an offence involving fraud
b. Which involves or is expected to involve individually an amount of rupees

       one crore or above

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.38  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

c. Is being or has been committed against the company by officers or
       employees of the company,

d. He shall immediately report the matter to the Central Government within
       such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.

In this regards Rule 13(2) the auditor shall report the matter to the Central
Government in following manner:
(a) The auditor shall report the matter to the Board or the Audit Committee,

       as the case may be, immediately but not later than 2 days of his knowledge
       of the fraud, seeking their reply or observations within 45 days;

(b) On receipt of such reply or observations, the auditor shall forward his report
       and the reply or observations of the Board or the Audit Committee along
       with his comments (on such reply or observations of the Board or the Audit
       Committee) to the Central Government within 15 days from the date of
       receipt of such reply or observations;

(c) In case the auditor fails to get any reply or observations from the Board
       or the Audit Committee within the stipulated period of 45 days, he shall
       forward his report to the Central Government along with a note containing
       the details of his report that was earlier forwarded to the Board or the Audit
       Committee for which he has not received any reply or observations;

(d) the report shall be filed electronically in form ADT-4.

(e)10 Omitted

(f) Omitted

Fraud involving amount less than one crore

Report to Audit Committee or Board [First Proviso to Sub-section 12 read with
Rule 13(3)]

In case of a fraud involving lesser than an amount of rupees one crore, the
auditor shall report the matter to the audit committee (if constituted under
section 177) or to the Board (in other cases) immediately but not later than two
days of his knowledge of the fraud and he shall report the matter specifying
the following:

a. Nature of Fraud with description;

10 clauses (e) and (f) have been omitted with effect from 14th July, 2025 vide the
Companies (Audit and Auditors) Amendment Rules, 2025 [Notification G.S.R. 359(E)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                            10.39

b. Approximate amount involved; and
c. Parties involved.
Disclosure in Board's Report [Second Proviso to Sub-section 12 read with Rule
13(4)]
The audit committee or the Board shall disclose the following details about such
frauds (reported to them, but not to the Central Government i.e. when amount
involved is less than ` 1 crore), in the Board's report;
a. Nature of fraud with description;
b. Approximate amount involved;
c. Parties involved, if remedial action not taken; and
d. Remedial actions taken.
Exception of bonafide faith [Sub-section13]
No duty to which an auditor of a company may be subject to shall be regarded as
having been contravened by reason of his reporting the matter referred to in sub-
section (12) if it is done in good faith.
Penalty for non-compliance of section 143(12) [Sub-section 15]
If any auditor, cost accountant, or company secretary in practice does not comply
with the provisions of sub-section (12), he shall
a. Be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of a listed company; and
b. Be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees in case of any other company.
Summary of quantum of penalty

Liable                                             In case of         Quantum

 auditor, cost accountant, or                        listed company   five lakh rupees
company secretary in practice                      any other company  one lakh rupees

  does not comply with the
provisions of section 143(12)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.40  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Illustration 12

NSH Ltd is engaged in the business of retail and is listed on National stock exchange.
The company recently acquired a business undertaking to expand its business. During
the year, certain transactions amounting to thousands of rupees were carried out by
the employees/ directors of the company which the management found suspicious
and appointed a forensic consultant to carry out their review. Pursuant to this review
process, certain suspicious transactions were identified by the management and the
management reported these transactions to the appropriate authorities. During the
course of statutory audit, such transactions were also made known to the statutory
auditors. How should the auditor deal with such matter?

Answer

As per Section 143(12) of the Companies Act, 2013, the auditor is required to report
to the Audit Committee or to the Board of Directors and, where applicable, to the
Central Government an offence of fraud in the company by its officers or employees
only if he is the first person to identify/note such instance in the course of
performance of his duties as an auditor. In this case, the suspicious transactions
have been identified by the management first and information about the same has
been given by the management to the auditor. Accordingly, the auditor should
report about this matter to the Audit Committee/ Board of Directors but the auditor
would not be required to report the same to Central Government.

Note - The auditors need to report about this matter appropriately in their CARO
report.

AUDIT OF GOVERNMENT COMPANIES [SUB-SECTION 5, 6 & 7]

Powers vested with CAG [Sub-section 5]

Sub-section 5 provides, in the case of a Government company or any other
company owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central Government, or
by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the Central Government
and partly by one or more State Governments:

a. CAG shall appoint the auditor under section 139(5) or 139(7) and

b. Direct such auditor the manner in which the accounts of the Government
       company are required to be audited and

c. Thereupon the auditor so appointed shall submit a copy of the audit
       report to the CAG.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.41

The audit report among other things, shall include the following:

a. The directions, if any, issued by the CAG;
b. The action taken thereon; and
c. Its impact on the accounts and financial statement of the company.
Comment by CAG and Supplementary Audit [Sub-section 6]
Sub-section 6 provides that, the CAG shall within 60 days from the date of receipt
of the audit report have a right to:

a. Conduct a supplementary audit of the financial statement of the company by
       such person or persons as he may authorize in this behalf; and for the
       purposes of such audit, require information or additional information to be
       furnished to any person or persons, so authorized, on such matters, by such
       person or persons, and in such form, as the CAG may direct; and

b. Comment upon or supplement such audit report.

Note

Any comments given by the CAG upon, or supplement to, the audit report shall be
sent by the company to every person entitled to copies of audited financial
statements under section 136(1) and also be placed before the AGM of the
company at the same time and in the same manner as the audit report.

Test Audit [Sub-section 7]

For Government Company or Company controlled by State Government or Central
Government, the CAG may, if he considers necessary, by an order, cause test audit
to be conducted of the accounts of such company, without prejudice to the
provisions related to Audit and Auditors. The provisions of section 19A of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act,
1971, shall apply to the report of such test audit.

AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS OF BRANCH OFFICE OF COMPANY [SUB-
SECTION 8 READ WITH RULE 12 OF THE COMPANIES (AUDIT &
AUDITORS) RULES, 2014]

Branch office in India

Where a company has a branch office, the accounts of that office shall be audited
either by:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.42  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

a. The company's auditor appointed under section 139, or

b. By any other person qualified for appointment as an auditor of the company
       under section 139.

Branch office outside India

If the branch office is situated in a country outside India, the accounts of the branch
office shall be audited either by:

a. The company's auditor or

b. By an accountant or

c. By any other person duly qualified to act as an auditor of the accounts of the
       branch office in accordance with the laws of that country.

Duties and powers of the company's auditor with reference to the audit of the
branch and the branch auditor [Rule 12 of the Companies (Audit & Auditors)
Rules, 2014]

The duties and powers of the company's auditor with reference to the audit of the
branch and the branch auditor, if any, shall be as contained in sub-sections (1) to
(4) of section 143.

The branch auditor shall submit his report to the company's auditor.

The provisions regarding reporting of fraud by the auditor shall also extend to such
branch auditor to the extent it relates to the concerned branch.
APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS OF SECTION 143 TO COST
ACCOUNTANTS AND COMPANY SECRETARY [SUB-SECTION 14]

The provisions of this section shall mutatis mutandis apply to:

a. The cost accountant conducting cost audit under section 148; or

b. The company secretary in practice conducting secretarial
       audit under section 204.

Sub-rule 5 to rule 13 of the Companies (Audit & Auditors) Rules, 2014 provide
exactly confirmatory provision.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                      AUDIT AND AUDITORS           10.43

     7. AUDITOR NOT TO RENDER CERTAIN
          SERVICES [SECTION 144]

An auditor appointed under this Act shall provide to the company only such other
services as are approved by the Board of Directors or the audit committee, as
the case may be.
But such services shall not include any of the following services (whether such
services are rendered directly or indirectly to the company or its holding
company or subsidiary company), namely:
a. Accounting and book keeping services;
b. Internal audit;
c. Design and implementation of any financial information system;
d. Actuarial services;
e. Investment advisory services;
f. Investment banking services;
g. Rendering of outsourced financial services;
h. Management services; and
i. Any other kind of services as may be prescribed

                                 Snapshot of prohibited services

Accounting and book   Investment advisory          Investment banking
   keeping services           services                     services

Internal audit        Actuarial services           Management services

    Rendering of             Design and            Any other kind of
outsourced financial  implementation of any        services as may be
                       financial information
        services                                        prescribed
                                system

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.44  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Students are advised to take note:

1. However no other kind of services has been prescribed till date under clause
i specified above.

2. Here it is worth noting that as per proviso to section 148(3), no person (or
firm including LLP) appointed under section 139 as an auditor of the company shall
be appointed for conducting the audit of cost records or vice-versa.

3. The term "directly or indirectly" shall include rendering of services by the
auditor

 In case of auditor being an individual, either himself or through his relative
       or any other person connected or associated with such individual or through
       any other entity, whatsoever, in which such individual has significant influence
       or control, or whose name or trademark or brand is used by such individual;

 In case of auditor being a firm, either itself or through any of its partners or
       through its parent, subsidiary or associate entity or through any other entity,
       whatsoever, in which the firm or any partner of the firm has significant
       influence or control, or whose name or trademark or brand is used by the firm
       or any of its partners.

Example 12: MNP Ltd. is a medium-sized company engaged in the business of
pharmaceuticals. For the year ended 31st March 2024, the company is looking for
appointment of GST (Goods and Services Tax) auditor. The company wants to
appoint somebody for this work who is familiar with the business of the company
i.e. who would have worked with the company in the past so that lesser efforts are
required to get the GST audit completed. The company has options of statutory
auditors that can be appointed for this work for betterment of
company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                                                AUDIT AND AUDITORS  10.45

Summary of what shall be included in directly and indirectly

Directly or Indirectly includes    In case of                                     Self
                                 auditor being
                                 INDIVIDUAL                                    Relatives

                                   In case of        Other person connected or associated with such
                                 auditor being                                individual

                                      FIRM       Entity in which such individual has significant influence
                                                                              or control

                                                  Entity whose name or trademark or brand is used by
                                                                           such individual

                                                                                  Firm

                                                                           Partners of firm

                                                                            Parent of firm

                                                                         Subsidiary of firm

                                                                     Associate entity of firm

                                                     Entity in which the firm has significant influence

                                                  Entity in which any partner of the firm has significant
                                                                        influence or control

                                                Entity whose name or trademark or brand is used by the
                                                                    firm or any of its partners

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.46  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

     8. AUDITORS TO SIGN AUDIT REPORTS, ETC.
          [SECTION 145]

Section 145 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for auditors to sign audit reports,
etc.

The person appointed as an auditor of the company shall sign the auditor's
report or sign or certify any other document of the company in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 141 (i.e. in case of firm including LLP is
appointed as an auditor of a company, only the partner who are Chartered
Accountants shall be authorized to act and sign on behalf of the firm).

The qualifications, observations or comments on financial transactions or
matters, which have any adverse effect on the functioning of the company
mentioned in the auditor's report shall be read before the company in general
meeting and shall be open to inspection by any member of the company.

Illustration 13

Whether entire audit report need to read before the company in general meeting?

Answer

No, as per section 145 of the Companies Act, 2013, qualifications, observations
or comments on financial transactions or matters, which have any adverse effect
on the functioning of the company mentioned in the auditor's report shall be read
before the company in general meeting and shall be open to inspection by any
member of the company.

     9. AUDITORS TO ATTEND GENERAL MEETING
          [SECTION 146]

Section 146 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for auditors to attend general
meeting.

All notices of, and other communications relating to, any general meeting shall
be forwarded to the auditor of the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                     AUDIT AND AUDITORS            10.47

The auditor shall, unless otherwise exempted by the company, attend either by
himself or through his authorized representative, who shall also be qualified to
be an auditor, any general meeting.

The auditor shall have right to be heard at such meeting on any part of the
business which concerns him as the auditor.

Summary of the section 146

 Serving notices of  Attend meeting either         Right to be heard
any General Meeting  by himself or through             on business

       to auditor         his authorized           concerning him as
                          representative                  auditor

Example 13
Modern Furniture Limited (MFL) convened its general meeting on 21st March 2024,
the notice of same was not served at auditor. Since company is obligated under
section 146 to forward a notice of general meeting to auditor as well, hence non-
serving of notice to auditor by MFL is in contravention to section 146 and liable for
penalty under section 147.

Illustration 14

Regarding the general meeting for which notice is served on auditor:

i. Whether auditor is mandatorily required to be attend the said general meeting?

ii. If yes, whether he is required to attend the meeting personally?

Answer

Answer to first part is yes, while no in case of second, because as per section 146
of the Companies Act 2013, the auditor shall, unless otherwise exempted by the
company, attend either by himself or through his authorized representative, who
shall also be qualified to be an auditor, any general meeting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.48           CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

10. PUNISHMENT FOR                                 CONTRAVENTION
     [SECTION 147]

Section 147 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for punishment for contravention.
CONTRAVENTION BY COMPANY [SUB-SECTION 1]

Penalty on company

If any of the provisions of sections 139 to 146 (both inclusive) is contravened, the
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty five
thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.

Penalty on officer/s who is/are in default

If any of the provisions of sections 139 to 146 (both inclusive) is contravened, every
officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which shall
not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Summary of quantum of penalty

       Liable                                      Minimum    Maximum
                                                      (in `)     (in `)

       Company                                     25,000     5,00,000

Every officer of the company who is in default     10,000     1,00,000

CONTRAVENTION BY AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 2 AND 3]

Penalty on auditor [Sub-section 2]

If an auditor of a company contravenes any of the provisions of section 139, section
144 or section 145, the auditor shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less
than twenty five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees or four
times the remuneration of the auditor, whichever is less.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                        AUDIT AND AUDITORS                      10.49

Summary of quantum of penalty

Liable   Liable for           Minimum                                 Maximum
                                 (in `)                                   (in `)

Auditor   Contravenes any                          25,000              Lower of
          of the provisions                                           i. 5,00,000
         of section 139, 144
                                                                              or
                 or 145                                    ii. 4 times the remuneration

Penalty for knowing/willful contravention [Proviso to Sub-section 2]

If an auditor has contravened any of the provisions of section 139, section 144 or
section 145, knowingly or willfully with the intention to deceive the company or its
shareholders or creditors or tax authorities, he shall be punishable with the
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1 year and with the fine which shall
not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh
rupees or eight times the remuneration of the auditor, whichever is less.

Summary of quantum of penalty

Liable Liable for             Minimum                           Maximum

Auditor  Knowing or     Fine of ` 50,000                          Fine, Lower of
             willful                                                ` 25,00,000
                                                                          Or
         contravenes
          any of the                                       8 times the remuneration

         provisions of                                     and
         section 139,
          144 or 145

                        Imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1 year

Refund of remuneration and payment of damages [Sub-section 3]
Where an auditor has been convicted under sub-section 2, he shall be liable to:
a. Refund the remuneration received by him to the company; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.50  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

b. Pay for damages to the company, statutory bodies or authorities or to
       members or creditors of the company for loss arising out of incorrect or
       misleading statements of particulars made in his audit report.

Note:

For operation of sub-section 3, the sub-section 4 empowers the Central
Government, to specify any statutory body or authority or an officer for ensuring
prompt payment of damages to the company or the persons, by notification.

Such body, authority or officer shall after payment of damages to such company or
persons file a report with the Central Government in respect of making such
damages in such manner as may be specified in the said notification.

CONTRAVENTION BY AUDIT FIRM [SUB-SECTION 5]

Where, in case of audit of a company being conducted by an audit firm,

It is proved that the partner or partners of the audit firm has or have acted in a
fraudulent manner or abetted or colluded in any fraud by, or in relation to or by,
the company or its directors or officers, the liability,

Whether civil or criminal as provided in the Companies Act, 2013, or in any other
law for the time being in force,

For such act shall be of the partner or partners concerned of the audit firm and of
the firm jointly and severally.

Note

1. In case of criminal liability of an audit firm, in respect of liability other than
       fine, the concerned partner or partners, who acted in a fraudulent manner or
       abetted or, as the case may be, colluded in any fraud shall only be liable.

2. Since act constitute to fraud, hence shall also be liable under section 447.
       Provisions of section 447, explained and decoded under book chapter 3 i.e.
       `Prospectus and allotment of securities' of this module. Students may refer
       the same.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.51

    11. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO SPECIFY AUDIT
          OF ITEMS OF COST IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN
          COMPANIES [SECTION 148]

COST RECORDS [SUB-SECTION 1 READ WITH RULE 3 AND 5 OF THE
COMPANIES (COST RECORDS AND AUDIT) RULES, 2014]

Who shall prepare cost records? [Rule 3]

Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions related to audit and auditor
(Chapter X), the Central Government may, by order, in respect of such class of
companies engaged in the production of such goods or providing such services as
may be prescribed, direct that particulars relating to the utilisation of material or
labour or to other items of cost as may be prescribed shall also be included in the
books of account kept under section 128 by that class of companies.

The Central Government shall, before issuing such order in respect of any class of
companies regulated under a special Act, consult the regulatory body constituted
or established under such special Act.

For the purposes of sub-section (1) of section 148 of the Act, rule 3 of the Companies
(Cost Records and Audit) Rules, 2014 provides, the class of companies (including foreign
companies defined in clause (42) of section 2 of the Act) engaged in the production of
the goods or providing services, specified in the Table A (6 Regulated Sectors) and/or
Table B (33 Non-Regulated Sector), having an overall turnover from all its products
and services of rupees thirty five crore or more during the immediately preceding
financial year, shall include cost records for such products or services in their books of
account.

Note

Nothing contained in Rule 3 shall apply to a company which is classified as a micro
enterprise or a small enterprise including as per the turnover criteria under sub-section
(9) of section 7 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.52  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

 Applicability for maintenance of Cost Records

        Domestic or Foreign Company

             Engaged in production of goods or providing services listed
             in table A (Regulated) or B (Non-Regulated) of Rule 3

                        Overall turnover from all of its products and services 
                        ` 35 crore (immediately preceding financial year)

COST AUDIT

If the Central Government is of the opinion, that it is necessary to do so, it may, by
order, direct that the audit of cost records of class of companies, which are covered
aforesaid (under sub-section 1 i.e. required to prepare cost records) and which have
a net worth of such amount as may be prescribed or a turnover of such amount as
may be prescribed, shall be conducted in the manner specified in the order.
As per sub-section 4, an audit conducted under this section (cost audit u/s 148)
shall be in addition to the audit conducted under section 143.
The cost statements, including other statements to be annexed to the cost audit
report, shall be approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed on behalf
of the Board by any of the director authorised by the Board, for submission to the
cost auditor to report thereon.
COST AUDITOR [SUB-SECTION 3 AND 5]
Who can be appointed as cost auditor? [Sub-Section 3]
Only a Cost Accountant, as defined under section 2(28)* of the Companies
Act, 2013, can be appointed as a cost auditor.

*Clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act,
1959 defines "Cost Accountant".
A Cost Accountant who holds a valid certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of
section 6 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and is in whole-time
practice.

Cost Accountant includes a Firm of Cost Accountants and a LLP of cost accountants.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.53

Accountants Act, 1959 and is in whole-time practice. Cost Accountant includes a
Firm of Cost Accountants and a LLP of cost accountants.

First Proviso to sub-section 3 provides that person appointed under section 139 as
an auditor of the company (i.e. company auditor) shall not be appointed for
conducting the audit of cost records.

Illustration 15
Can a professional LLP which have CAs and CMAs as its partners, appointed as Cost
Auditor u/s 148 as well as Statutory Independent Auditor u/s 139

Answer

No, because as per proviso to section 148(3), no person (or firm including LLP)
appointed under section 139 as an auditor of the company shall be appointed for
conducting the audit of cost records or vice-versa.

Qualifications, disqualifications, rights, duties and obligations of cost Auditor
[Sub-section 5]

The qualifications, disqualifications, rights, duties and obligations applicable to
auditors (i.e. applicable to company auditor) shall, so far as may be applicable,
apply to a cost auditor appointed under section 148 and it shall be the duty of the
company to give all assistance and facilities to the cost auditor appointed under
this section for auditing the cost records of the company.

Provided that the report on the audit of cost records shall be submitted by the
cost accountant to the Board of Directors of the company.

Note:

The provisions of sub-section (12) of section 143 of the Act and the relevant rules
made thereunder shall apply mutatis mutandis to a cost auditor during performance
of his functions under section 148 of the Act and rule notified thereunder.

Cost auditor to comply with cost auditing standards [Second Proviso to Sub-
section 3]

The auditor conducting the cost audit shall comply with the cost auditing
standards.

Here, the expression "cost auditing standards" mean such standards as are issued
by the Institute of Cost Accountants of India (erstwhile ICWAI), constituted under

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.54  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959, with the approval of the Central
Government.

COST AUDIT REPORT

A company shall within thirty days from the date of receipt of a copy of the cost
audit report prepared in pursuance of a direction under sub-section (2) furnish the
Central Government with such report along with full information and explanation
on every reservation or qualification contained therein. [Sub- section (6)]

If, after considering the cost audit report referred to under this section and the
information and explanation furnished by the company under sub-section (6), the
Central Government is of the opinion that any further information or explanation is
necessary, it may call for such further information and explanation and the
company shall furnish the same within such time as may be specified by that
Government. [Sub- section (7)]

CONTRAVENTION AND PUNISHMENT THEREOF [SUB-SECTION 8]

If any default is made in complying with the provisions of section 148;

a. The company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
       punishable in the manner as provided in section 147(1);

b. The cost auditor of the company who is in default shall be punishable in the
       manner as provided in sub-sections (2) to (4) of section 147.

Note: The provision of the section 147 explained in details under heading 10, earlier
in this chapter.

    12. NFRA [NATIONAL FINANCIAL REPORTING
          AUTHORITY] AND AUDITOR

MONITORING AND ENFORCING COMPLIANCE WITH AUDITING
STANDARDS

Rule 8 of The National Financial Reporting Authority Rules, 2018 empowers
NFRA for the purpose of monitoring and enforcing compliance with auditing
standards under the Act by a company or a body corporate governed under
rule 3.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.55

NFRA may:

a. Review working papers (including audit plan and other audit documents)
       and communications related to the audit;

b. Evaluate the sufficiency of the quality control system of the auditor and the
       manner of documentation of the system by the auditor; and

c. Perform such other testing of the audit, supervisory, and quality control
       procedures of the auditor as may be considered necessary or appropriate.

Rule 8 further provides that:

NFRA may require:

1. Require an auditor to report on its governance practices and internal
processes designed to promote audit quality, protect its reputation and reduce
risks including risk of failure of the auditor and may take such action on the report
as may be necessary.

2. Seek additional information or may require the personal presence of the
auditor for seeking additional information or explanation in connection with the
conduct of an audit.

3. Send a separate report containing proprietary or confidential
information to the Central Government for its information.

4. Where the NFRA finds or has reason to believe that any law or professional
or other standard has or may have been violated by an auditor, it may decide
on the further course of investigation or enforcement action through its
concerned Division.

NFRA shall:

1. Perform its monitoring and enforcement activities through its officers or
experts with sufficient experience in audit of the relevant industry.

2. Publish its findings relating to non-compliances on its website and in such
other manner as it considers fit, unless it has reasons not to do so in the public
interest and it records the reasons in writing.

NFRA shall not

Publish proprietary or confidential information, unless it has reasons to do so in
the public interest and it records the reasons in writing.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.56  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

OVERSEEING THE QUALITY OF SERVICES AND SUGGESTING
MEASURES FOR IMPROVEMENT

Further Rule 9 of The National Financial Reporting Authority Rules, 2018
empowers NFRA for overseeing the quality of services and suggesting measures
for improvement

a. On the basis of its review, the NFRA may direct an auditor to take measures
       for improvement of audit quality including changes in their audit processes,
       quality control, and audit reports and specify a detailed plan with time-limits.

b. It shall be the duty of the auditor to make the required improvements and
       send a report to the NFRA explaining how it has complied with the directions
       made by the NFRA.

c. The NFRA shall monitor the improvements made by the auditor and take such
       action as it deems fit depending on the progress made by the auditor.

d. The NFRA may refer cases with regard to overseeing the quality of service of
       auditors of companies or bodies corporate referred to in rule 3 to the Quality
       Review Board constituted under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 or call
       for any report or information in respect of such auditors or companies or
       bodies corporate from such Board as it may deem appropriate.

e. The NFRA may take the assistance of experts for its oversight and monitoring
       activities.

FILLING OF RETURN WITH NFRA

Rule 5 requires every auditor of classes of companies and bodies corporate
governed by the NFRA, shall file a return with the Authority i.e. NFRA on or
before 30th November every year in Form NFRA-2.

SUMMARY

 First Auditor shall be appointed by Board of directors within thirty days

       from the date of registration of the company, who hold office till first
       annual general meeting. Thereafter every company shall, at the first annual
       general meeting, appoint an individual or a firm as an auditor who shall
       hold office from the conclusion of that meeting till the conclusion of its sixth
       annual general meeting and thereafter till the conclusion of every sixth
       meeting and so on.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.57

 Whereas, in case of Government Company or those controlled by

       Government (central or state or any combination thereof) auditor shall be
       appointed by CAG (Comptroller and Auditor-General of India).

 The auditor appointed under section 139 may be removed from his office

       before the expiry of his term only by a special resolution of the company,
       after obtaining the previous approval of the Central Government in that
       behalf in the prescribed manner

 Only a Chartered Accountants in practice can be appointed as auditor,

       where firm is appointed then only a Chartered Accountants in practice shall
       be authorised by the firm to act and sign on behalf of the firm. Section 141
       (3) list out certain disqualifications that bar an individual or firm to appointed
       as auditor.

 The remuneration of the auditor of a company shall be fixed in its general

       meeting or in such manner as may be determined therein. Board may fix
       remuneration of the first auditor appointed by it.

 Every auditor shall comply with the auditing standards. Rights and duties

       of auditor are prescribed in section 143. The person appointed as an auditor
       of the company shall sign the auditor's report.

 All notices of any general meeting shall be forwarded to the auditor of

       the company, and the auditor shall, unless otherwise exempted by the
       company, attend either by himself or through his authorised representative.
       Auditor shall have right to be heard at such meeting on any part of the
       business which concerns him as the auditor.

 An auditor appointed under this Act shall provide the company only such

       other services as are approved by the Board of Directors or the audit
       committee, as the case may be, but certain services are specifically
       prohibited to render either directly or indirectly. These are; (a) accounting
       and book keeping services; (b) internal audit; (c) design and implementation
       of any financial information system; (d) actuarial services; (e) investment
       advisory services; (f) investment banking services; (g) rendering of
       outsourced financial services; and (h) management services.

 Penalties for contravention of the applicable provisions by company,

       auditor, and audit firm is provided under section 147. In case, it is proved
       that the partner or partners of the audit firm has or have acted in a fraudulent
       manner or abetted or colluded in any fraud by, or in relation to or by, the
       company or its directors or officers; then in addition to section 147, such

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.58  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       offence is punishable under section 447; even liable for civil or criminal
       liability under any other law for the time being in force.

 Central Government may, by order, in respect of such class of companies

       engaged in the production of such goods or providing such services as may
       be prescribed, direct that particulars relating to the utilisation of material
       or labour or to such other items of cost as may be prescribed shall also be
       included in the books of account kept by such class of companies. Further if
       the Central Government is of the opinion, in relation to any such company,
       that it is necessary to do so, it may, by order, direct that the audit of cost
       records of such company shall be conducted in the manner specified therein.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Birthday Card Limited, a listed company can appoint or re-appoint, Mishra &
       Associates (a firm of Chartered Accountants), as their statutory auditors for:
       (a) One year only
       (b) One term of 3 consecutive years only
       (c) One term of 4 consecutive years only
       (d) Two terms of 5 consecutive years

2. Every company shall, at the first annual general meeting, appoint an individual
       or a firm as an auditor who shall hold office from the conclusion of that meeting
       till the conclusion of its:
       (a) Second annual general meeting
       (b) Fourth annual general meeting
       (c) Sixth annual general meeting
       (d) Eight annual general meeting

3. For appointing an auditor other than the retiring auditor,
       (a) Special notice is required.
       (b) Ordinary notice is required.
       (c) Neither ordinary nor special notice is required
       (d) Approval of Central Government is required.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.59

Descriptive Questions

1. State the procedure for the following, explaining the relevant provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013:

       (i) Appointment of First Auditor, when the Board of directors did not appoint
               the First Auditor within one month from the date of registration of the
               company.

       (ii) Removal of Statutory Auditor (appointed in last Annual General Meeting)
               before the expiry of his term.

2. One-fourth of the subscribed capital of AMC Limited was held by the
       Government of Rajasthan. Mr. Neeraj, a Chartered Accountant, was appointed
       as an auditor of the Company at the Annual General Meeting held on 30 April,
       2024 by an ordinary resolution. Mr. Sanjay, a shareholder of the company,
       objects to the manner of appointment of Mr. Neeraj on the ground of violation
       of the Companies Act, 2013. Decide whether the objection of Mr. Sanjay is
       tenable? Also examine the consequences of the above appointment under the
       said Act.

3. EF Limited appointed an individual firm, Naresh & Company, Chartered
       Accountants, as Auditors of the company at the Annual General Meeting held
       on 30 September 2023. Mrs. Kamala, wife of Mr. Naresh, invested in the equity
       shares face value of ` 1 lakh of EF Limited on 15 October 2023. But Naresh &
       Company continues to function as statutory auditors of the company. Advice.

4. Explain how the auditor will be appointed in the following cases:

       (i) A Government company within the meaning of section 394 of the
               Companies Act, 2013.

       (ii) A public company whose shareholders include XYZ Bank (a nationalized
               bank) holding 18% of the subscribed capital of the company.

5. Examine the following situations in the light of the Companies Act, 2013:

       "Mr. Abhi", a practicing Chartered Accountant, is holding securities of Abhiman
       Ltd. having face value of ` 1000/-. Whether Mr. Abhi is qualified for
       appointment as an Auditor of Abhiman Ltd.?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        10.60  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

6. Examine whether the following persons are eligible for being appointed as
       auditor under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013:

       (i) "Mr. Prakash" is a practicing Chartered Accountant and "Mr. Aakash",
               who is a relative of "Mr. Prakash" is holding securities of "ABC Ltd."
               having face value of ` 70,000/- (market value ` 1, 10,000/-). Directors
               of ABC Ltd. want to appoint Mr. Prakash as an auditor of the company.

       (ii) Mr. Ramesh is a practicing Chartered Accountant indebted to MNP Ltd.
               for rupees 6 lakh. Directors of MNP Ltd. want to appoint Mr. Ramesh as
               an auditor of the company.

       (iii) Mrs. KVJ spouse of Mr. Kumar, a Chartered Accountant, is the store keeper
               of PRC Ltd. Directors of PRC Ltd. want to appoint Mr. Kumar as an auditor
               of the company

7. The Board of Directors of A Limited requested its Statutory Auditor to accept
       the assignment of designing and implementation of suitable financial
       information system to strengthen the internal control mechanism of the
       company. How will you approach to this proposal, as a Statutory Auditor of A
       Ltd., taking into account the consequences, if any, of accepting this proposal?

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.      (d) Two terms of 5 consecutive years

2.      (c) Sixth annual general meeting

3.      (a) Special notice is required.

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. (i)  Section 139(6) of the Companies Act, 2013 lays down that the first auditor
        of a company shall be appointed by the Board of Directors within 30 days
        of the registration of the company.

        Section 139 (6) continues to provide further that if the Board of Directors
        fails to appoint such auditor, it shall inform the members of the company,
        who shall within ninety days at an extraordinary general meeting appoint

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.61

        such auditor and such auditor shall hold office till the conclusion of the
        first annual general meeting.

        From the above provisions of law if the Board of Directors fails to appoint
        the first auditors within the stipulated 30 days, it shall take the following
        steps:

        a. Inform the members of the Company;

        b. Immediately take steps to convene an extra ordinary general
                meeting not later than 90 days;

        c. Members shall at that extra ordinary meeting appoint the first
                auditors of the company;

        d. The first auditors so appointed shall hold office upto the conclusion
                of the first AGM of the company.

(ii) Section 140 of the Companies Act, 2013 prescribes certain procedure for
        removal of auditors. Under section 140 (1) the auditor appointed under
        section 139 may be removed from his office before the expiry of his term
        only by a special resolution of the company, after obtaining the previous
        approval of the Central Government in that behalf in the prescribed
        manner. From this sub section it is clear that the approval of the Central
        Government shall be taken first and thereafter the special resolution of the
        company should be passed.

        Provided that before taking any action under this sub-section, the auditor
        concerned shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

        Therefore, in terms of section 140 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013 read with
        Rule 7 of the Companies (Audit & Auditors) Rules, 2014, following steps
        should be taken for the removal of an auditor before the completion of his
        term:

        The application to the Central Government for removal of auditor shall be
        made in Form ADT-2 and accompanied with fees as provided for this
        purpose under the Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014.

        The application shall be made to the Central Government within thirty days
        of the resolution passed by the Board.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.62  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               The company shall hold the general meeting within sixty days of receipt of
               approval of the Central Government for passing the special resolution.

2. As per the section 2(45) of the Companies Act, 2013, the holding of 25%
       shares of AMC Ltd. by the Government of Rajasthan does not make it a
       government company. Hence, it will be treated as a non-government
       company.

       Under section 139 of the Companies Act, 2013, the appointment of an auditor
       by a company vests generally with the members of the company except in
       the case of the first auditors and in the filling up of the casual vacancy not
       caused by the resignation of the auditor, in which case, the power to appoint
       the auditor vests with the Board of Directors. The appointment by the
       members is by way of an ordinary resolution only and no exceptions have
       been made in the Act whereby a special resolution is required for the
       appointment of the auditors.

       Therefore, the contention of Mr. Sanjay is not tenable. The appointment is
       valid under the Companies Act, 2013.

3. According to section 141(3)(d)(i) of the Companies Act, 2013, a person who,
       or his relative or partner holds any security of the company or its subsidiary
       or of its holding or associate company a subsidiary of such holding company,
       which carries voting rights, such person cannot be appointed as auditor of
       the company. Provided that the relative of such person may hold security or
       interest in the company of face value not exceeding 1 lakh rupees as
       prescribed under the Companies (Audit and Auditors) Rules, 2014.

       In the case Mr. Naresh, Chartered Accountants, did not hold any such security.
       But Mrs. Kamala, his wife held equity shares of EF Limited of face value
       ` 1 lakh, which is within the specified limit.

       Further Section 141(4) provides that if an auditor becomes subject, after his
       appointment, to any of the disqualifications specified in sub-section 3 of section
       141, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office of auditor. Hence, Naresh &
       Company can continue to function as auditors of the company even after 15
       October 2023 i.e. after the investment made by his wife in the equity shares of
       EF Limited.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.63

4. (i) The appointment and re-appointment of auditor of a Government
               Company or a government controlled company is governed by the
               provisions of section 139 of the Companies Act, 2013 which are
               summarized as under:

               The first auditor shall be appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor
               General of India within 60 days from the date of incorporation and in case
               of failure to do so, the Board shall appoint auditor within next 30 days and
               on failure to do so by Board of Directors, it shall inform the members, who
               shall appoint the auditor within 60 days at an extraordinary general
               meeting (EGM), such auditor shall hold office till conclusion of first Annual
               General Meeting.

               In case of subsequent auditor for existing government companies, the
               Comptroller & Auditor General of India shall appoint the auditor within a
               period of 180 days from the commencement of the financial year and the
               auditor so appointed shall hold his position till the conclusion of the
               Annual General Meeting.

       (ii) In the given case as the total shareholding of the XYZ Bank is just 18%
               of the subscribed capital of the company, it is not a government
               company. Hence the provisions applicable to non-government
               companies in relation to the appointment of auditors shall apply.

               The auditor shall be appointed as follows:

               (1) The company shall, at the first annual general meeting, appoint an
                       individual or a firm as an auditor who shall hold office from the
                       conclusion of that meeting till the conclusion of its sixth annual
                       general meeting and thereafter till the conclusion of every sixth
                       meeting.

               (2) Before such appointment of auditor is made, the written consent of
                       the auditor to such appointment, and a certificate from him or firm of
                       auditors that the appointment, if made, shall be obtained from the
                       auditor:

               Further, the company shall inform the auditor concerned of his or its
               appointment, and also file a notice of such appointment with the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        10.64  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

        Registrar within 15 days of the meeting in which the auditor is
        appointed.

5. As per section 141(3)(d)(i), an auditor is disqualified to be appointed as an
       auditor if he, or his relative or partner holds any security of or interest in the
       company or its subsidiary, or of its holding or associate company or a
       subsidiary of such holding company.

       In the present case, Mr. Abhi is holding security of ` 1000 in the Abhiman Ltd,
       therefore, he is not eligible for appointment as an auditor of Abhiman Ltd.

6. (i)  As per section 141 (3)(d)(i) of the Companies Act, 2013, an auditor is
        disqualified to be appointed as an auditor if he, or his relative or partner
        holding any security of or interest in the company or its subsidiary, or
        of its holding or associate company or a subsidiary of such holding
        company. Further as per proviso to this Section, the relative of the
        auditor may hold the securities or interest in the company of face value
        not exceeding of ` 1,00,000. In the present case, Mr. Aakash (relative
        of Mr. Prakash, an auditor), is having securities of ABC Ltd. having face
        value of ` 70,000 (market value ` 1,10,000), which is within the limit as
        per requirement of under the proviso to section 141 (3)(d)(i). Therefore,
        Mr. Prakash will not be disqualified to be appointed as an auditor of
        ABC Ltd.

(ii) As per section 141(3)(d)(ii), an auditor is disqualified to be appointed as
        an auditor if he or his relative or partner is indebted to the company, or
        its subsidiary, or its holding or associate company or a subsidiary of
        such holding company, in excess of rupees 5 Lakh. In the instant case,
        Mr. Ramesh will be disqualified to be appointed as an auditor of MNP
        Ltd. as he indebted to MNP Ltd. for rupees 6 Lakh.

(iii) As per section 141(3)(f), an auditor is disqualified to be appointed as an
        auditor if a person whose relative is a director or is in the employment
        of the company as a director or a key managerial personnel. In the
        instant case, since Mrs. KVJ Spouse of Mr. Kumar (Chartered
        Accountant) is the store keeper (not a director or KMP) of PRC Ltd.,
        hence Mr. Kumar will not be disqualified to be appointed as an auditor
        in the said company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
AUDIT AND AUDITORS                                 10.65

7. According to section 144 of the Companies Act, 2013, an auditor appointed
       under this Act shall provide to the company only such other services as are
       approved by the Board of Directors or the audit committee, as the case may
       be. But such services shall not include designing and implementation of any
       financial information system.

       In the said instance, the Board of directors of A Ltd. requested its Statutory
       Auditor to accept the assignment of designing and implementation of
       suitable financial information system to strengthen the internal control
       mechanism of the company. As per the above provision said service is strictly
       prohibited.

       In case the Statutory Auditor accepts the assignment, he will attract the penal
       provisions as specified in Section 147 of the Companies Act, 2013.

       In the light of the above provisions, we shall advise the Statutory Auditor not
       to take up the above stated assignment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
