CHAPTER  12

THE LIMITED LIABILITY
PARTNERSHIP ACT,
2008

                                      LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:

 Comprehend the meaning of the term `Limited Liability
      Partnership', its need, scope and advantages

 Know about the Incorporation of LLP, Partners and their
      relations, financial disclosures, conversions, winding up and
      dissolution.

 Differentiate between `Limited Liability Partnership' and
      other forms of organization.
              12.2           CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

                                    LLP

Introduction  Incorporation  Partnership   Financial        Winding     Differences
                              and Their   Disclosures        up and      with other
                              Relations                    dissolution
                                                                           form of
              Meaning                                                   organisation
                 and
                        Advantages        Characteristics
              concept

1. INTRODUCTION

The Ministry of Law and Justice on 9th January 2007 notified the Limited Liability

Partnership Act, 2008.

The Parliament passed the Limited Liability                The LLP Act,
Partnership Bill on 12th December, 2008 and the
President of India has assented the Bill on 7th            2008         is

January, 2009 and called as the Limited Liability          applicable to

Partnership Act, 2008 (the "LLP Act, 2008").               the whole of

                                                           India

This Act has been enacted to make provisions for the formation and regulation of
Limited Liability Partnerships and for matters connected there with or incidental
thereto.

The LLP Act, 2008 has 81 sections (of which section 81 is now omitted with effect
from 1st April 2022) and 4 schedules.

The First Schedule deals with mutual rights and duties of partners and limited
liability partnership and its partners where there is absence of a formal agreement
amongst them.

The Second Schedule deals with conversion of a firm into LLP.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.3
                                           ACT, 2008

The Third Schedule deals with conversion of a private company into LLP.

The Fourth Schedule deals with conversion of unlisted public company into LLP.

The Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the Registrar of Companies (ROC) are
entrusted with the task of administrating the LLP Act, 2008. The Central
Government has the authority to frame the Rules with regard to the LLP Act, 2008,
and can amend them by notifications in the Official Gazette, from time to time.

It is also to be noted that the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 is not applicable to
LLPs.

Note

The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 has been recently amended through
the Limited Liability Partnership (Amendment) Act, 2021 dated 13th August, 2021.

Need of new form of Limited Liability Partnership

The lawmakers envisaged the need for bringing out a new legislation for creation
of the Limited Liability Partnership to meet with the contemporary growth of the
Indian economy. A need has been felt for a new corporate form that would
provide an alternative to the traditional partnership with
unlimited personal liability on the one hand and the
statute-based governance structure of the limited
liability company on the other hand. In order to enable
professional expertise and entrepreneurial initiative and to combine and operate
in flexible, innovative and efficient manner, the LLP Act, 2008 was enacted.

Thus, LLP as a form of business organization is an alternative corporate business
vehicle. It provides the benefits of limited liability but allows its members the
flexibility of organizing their internal structure as a partnership based on a
mutually arrived agreement. The LLP form enables entrepreneurs, professionals
and enterprises providing services of any kind or engaged in scientific and
technical disciplines, to form commercially efficient vehicles suited to their
requirements. Owing to flexibility in its structure and operation, the LLP is a
suitable vehicle for small enterprises and for investment by venture capital.
12.4                 CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

2. LIMITED           LIABILITY          PARTNERSHIP-

MEANING AND CONCEPT

Meaning: LLP is a new form of legal business entity with
limited liability. It is an alternative corporate business
vehicle that not only gives the benefits of limited liability at
low compliance cost but allows its partners the flexibility of
organising their internal structure as a traditional
partnership. The LLP is a separate legal entity and, while the
LLP itself will be liable to the full extent of its assets, the liability of the partners
will be limited to the extent of their capital contribution.

LLP as a separate legal entity and business organisation is an alternative
corporate business form that gives the benefits of limited liability of a company
and the flexibility of a partnership.

Since LLP contains elements of both `a corporate structure' as well as `a
partnership firm structure' LLP is called a hybrid between a company and a
partnership.

   Liability of    New form of legal                Alternative
partners will be  business entity with              corporate
 limited to the                                 business vehicle
extent of their      limited liability
                                            Allows the
     capital            LLP                partners the
 contribution                              flexibility of
                                        organising their
LLP itself will be                      internal structure
liable for the full

   extent of its
      assets
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.5
                                           ACT, 2008

DEFINITIONS

1. Address [(Section 2(1)(a)]: "Address" in relation to a partner
       of a limited liability partnership, means--

       (i) if an individual, his usual residential address; and

       (ii) if a body corporate, the address of its registered office.

2. Body Corporate [(Section 2(1)(d)]: It means a company as defined in
       clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 and includes--
       (i) a LLP registered under this Act;

       (ii) a LLP incorporated outside India; and

       (iii) a company incorporated outside India,

       but does not include--

       (i) a corporation sole;

       (ii) a co-operative society registered under any law for the time being in
               force; and

       (iii) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined in clause
               (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 or a limited liability
               partnership as defined in this Act), which the Central Government may,
               by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.

              Means                  Does not include ­
                                    corporation sole; co-
A company & includes - LLP,    operative society & any other
foreign LLP, foreign company,   body corporate notified by
                                    Central Government.

3. Business [Section 2(1)(e)]: "Business" includes every trade, profession,
       service and occupation except any activity which the Central Government
       may, by notification, exclude.
12.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

4. Chartered Accountant [Section 2(1)(f)]: means a Chartered Accountant as
       defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered
       Accountants Act, 1949 and who has obtained a certificate of practice under
       sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act.

5. Designated Partner [Section 2(1)(j)]: "Designated partner" means any
       partner designated as such pursuant to section 7.

6. Entity [Section 2(1)(k)]: `'Entity" means any body corporate and includes,
       for the purposes of sections 18, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52 and 53, a firm setup
       under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.

7. Financial Year [Section 2(1)(l)]: "Financial year", in relation to a LLP, means
       the period from the 1st day of April of a year to the 31st day of March of
       the following year.

       However, in the case of a LLP incorporated after the 30th day of September
       of a year, the financial year may end on the 31st day of March of the year
       next following that year.

       Example 1: If a LLP has been incorporated on 15th October, 2022, then its
       financial year may be from 15th October, 2022 to 31st March, 2024.
       However, the LLP can always maintain its first accounts from 15th October,
       2022 to 31st March, 2023 i.e. for a period of less than 12 months. The period
       for which the first accounts of LLP are prepared shall not exceed 18 months.

       The Income Tax department has prescribed uniform financial year from 1st
       April to 31st March of next year. In keeping with the Income tax law, the
       financial year for LLP should always be from 1st April to 31st March each
       year.

8. Foreign LLP [section 2(1)(m)]: It means a LLP formed, incorporated or
       registered outside India which establishes a place of business within India.

9. Limited liability partnership [Section 2(1)(n)]: Limited Liability
       Partnership means a partnership formed and registered under this Act.

10. Limited Liability partnership agreement [Section 2(1)(o)]:
       It means any written agreement between the partners of the
       LLP or between the LLP and its partners which determines the
       mutual rights and duties of the partners and their rights and
       duties in relation to that LLP.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.7
                                           ACT, 2008

       The First Schedule shall be applicable for all matters not covered by the
       Agreement w.r.t. the mutual rights and duties of the partners and their
       rights and duties in relation to the LLP.

11. Name [Section 2(1)(p)]: in relation to a partner of a limited liability
       partnership, means--

       (i) if an individual, his forename, middle name and surname; and

       (ii) if a body corporate, its registered name;

12. Partner [Section 2(1)(q)]: Partner, in relation to a LLP, means any person
       who becomes a partner in the LLP in accordance with the LLP agreement.

13. Regional Director [Section 2(1)(ra)]: means a person appointed as such
       by the Central Government for the purpose of this Act or the Companies Act
       2013, as the case may be.

14. Registrar [Section 2(1)(s)]: means a person appointed by Central
       Government as Registrar, an Additional Registrar, a Joint Registrar, a Deputy
       Registrar or an Assistant Registrar, for the purpose of this Act or the
       Companies Act, 2013, as the case may be.

15. Small limited liability partnership [Section 2(1)(ta)]: It means a limited
       liability partnership--

       (i) the contribution of which, does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees or
               such higher amount, not exceeding five crore rupees, as may be
               prescribed; and

       (ii) the turnover of which, as per the Statement of Accounts and Solvency
               for the immediately preceding financial year, does not exceed forty
               lakh rupees or such higher amount, not exceeding fifty crore rupees,
               as may be prescribed; or

       (iii) which meets such other requirements as may be prescribed, and fulfils
               such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;
12.8          CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Contribution  Up to ` 25L, &

Turnover for immediately Up to ` 40 L, or
preceding F.Y.

Fulfills      prescribed                   terms  and

              conditions

16. Tribunal [Section 2(1)(u)]: means the National Company Law Tribunal
       constituted u/s 408 of Companies Act, 2013.

Note:

Applicability of the Companies Act, 2013: Words and expressions used and not
defined in this Act but defined in the Companies Act, 2013 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. [Section 2(2)]

Non-applicability of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932: Save as otherwise
provided, the provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 shall not apply to a
LLP. [Section 4]

CHARACTERISTIC OF LLP

         Body Corporate
         Perpetual Succession
         Separate legal entity
         Mutual Agency
         LLP Agreement
         Artificial Legal person
         Common Seal
         Limited liability
         Management of business
         Minimum & maximum number of members
         Business for profit only
         Investigation
         Compromise or Arrangement
         Conversion into LLP
         E-filing of documents
         Foreign LLPs
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.9
                                           ACT, 2008

1. LLP is a body corporate: Section 2(1)(d) of the LLP Act, 2008 provides that
       a LLP is a body corporate formed and incorporated under this Act. Section 3
       of the LLP Act provides that LLP is a legal entity separate from that of its
       partners and shall have perpetual succession. Therefore, any change in the
       partners of a LLP shall not affect the existence, rights or liabilities of the LLP.

2. Perpetual Succession: The LLP can continue its existence irrespective of
       changes in partners. Death, insanity, retirement or insolvency of partners
       has no impact on the existence of LLP. It is capable of entering into
       contracts and holding property in its own name.

3. Separate Legal Entity: Section 3 of LLP Act provides that a LLP is a body
       corporate formed and incorporated under this Act and is a legal entity
       separate from that of its partners. The LLP is liable to the full extent of its
       assets but liability of the partners is limited to their agreed contribution in
       the LLP. In other words, creditors of LLP shall be the creditors of LLP alone.

4. Mutual Agency: No partner is liable on account of the independent or un-
       authorized actions of other partners, thus individual partners are shielded
       from joint liability created by another partner's wrongful business decisions
       or misconduct. In other words, all partners will be the agents of the LLP
       alone. No one partner can bind the other partner by his acts.

5. LLP Agreement: Mutual rights and duties of the partners within a LLP are
       governed by an agreement between the partners. The LLP Act, 2008
       provides flexibility to partner to devise the agreement as per their choice.
       In the absence of any such agreement, the mutual rights and duties shall be
       governed by Schedule I of the LLP Act, 2008.

6. Artificial Legal Person: A LLP is an artificial legal person because it is
       created by a legal process and is clothed with all rights of an individual. It
       can do everything which any natural person can do, except of course that, it
       cannot be sent to jail, cannot take an oath, cannot marry or get divorce nor
       can it practice a learned profession like CA or Medicine. A LLP is invisible,
       intangible, immortal (it can be dissolved by law alone) but not fictitious
       because it really exists.

7. Common Seal: A LLP being an artificial person can act through its partners
       and designated partners. LLP may have a common seal, if it decides to have
       one [Section 14(c)]. Thus, it is not mandatory for a LLP to have a common
12.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       seal. It shall remain under the custody of some responsible official and it
       shall be affixed in the presence of at least 2 designated partners of the LLP.

8. Limited Liability: Every partner of a LLP is, for the purpose of the business
       of LLP, the agent of the LLP, but not of other partners (Section 26). The
       liability of the partners will be limited to their agreed contribution in the
       LLP. Such contribution may be of tangible or intangible nature or both.

       Example 2: The professionals like Engineering consultants, Legal Advisors
       and Accounting Professional are afraid of entering into business due to
       unlimited liability. Hence, the LLP Act provides an avenue for these
       professionals to enter into Limited Liability Partnership firms which restrict
       their liability to the agreed amount. This has encouraged Professionals to
       form LLP.

9. Management of Business: The partners in the LLP are entitled to manage
       the business of LLP. But only the designated partners are responsible for
       legal compliances.

10. Minimum and Maximum number of Partners: Every LLP shall have at
       least two partners and shall also have at least 2 individuals as designated
       partners, of whom at least one shall be resident in India. There is no
       maximum limit on the partners in LLP.

11. Business for Profit Only: The essential requirement for
       forming LLP is carrying on a lawful business with a view to
       earn profit. Thus, LLP cannot be formed for charitable or
       non-economic purpose.

12. Investigation: The Central Government shall have powers to investigate the
       affairs of an LLP by appointment of competent authority for the purpose.

13. Compromise or Arrangement: Any compromise or agreements including
       merger and amalgamation of LLPs shall be in accordance with the
       provisions of the LLP Act, 2008.

14. Conversion into LLP: A firm, private company or an unlisted public
       company would be allowed to be converted into LLP in accordance with the
       provisions of LLP Act, 2008.

15. E-Filling of Documents: Every form or application of document required to
       be filed or delivered under the act and rules made thereunder, shall be filed
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.11
                                           ACT, 2008

       in computer readable electronic form on its website www.mca.gov.in and
       authenticated by a partner or designated partner of LLP by the use of
       electronic or digital signature.

16. Foreign LLPs: Section 2(1)(m) defines foreign limited liability partnership
       "as a limited liability partnership formed, incorporated, or registered outside
       India which established a place of business within India". Foreign LLP can
       become a partner in an Indian LLP.

ADVANTAGES OF LLP FORM

LLP form is a form of business model which:
1. Is organised and operates on the basis of an agreement.
2. Provides flexibility without imposing detailed legal and procedural

       requirements.
3. Easy to form.
4. All partners enjoy limited liability.
5. Easy to dissolve.
Partners [Section 5]

Any individual or body corporate may be a partner in a LLP.
However, an individual shall not be capable of becoming a partner
of a LLP, if--

(a) he has been found to be of unsound mind by a Court of
       competent jurisdiction and the finding is in force;

(b) he is an undischarged insolvent; or

(c) he has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is
       pending.

The following persons can become partner in LLP:
(i) Individuals (Resident Indians including Non Resident Indians &

       Overseas Citizen of India as well as foreign nationals)*
(ii) Limited Liability Partnerships
(iii) Companies (including foreign companies)*
12.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (iv) Foreign Limited Liability Partnerships*

       (v) Limited Liability Partnerships incorporated outside India

       (vi) Foreign Companies.

       Co-operative society and corporation sole cannot become partner in a LLP.

       *In case of introduction of capital / acquisition of existing stake in LLP by
       Persons resident outside India (other than NRIs & OCIs investing on a non-
       repatriation basis), the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) compliances shall
       have to be undertaken by the LLP in which such investment is made.

Minimum number of Partners [Section 6]

(i) Every LLP shall have at least two partners.

(ii) If at any time the number of partners of a LLP is reduced
       below two and the LLP carries on business for more than six
       months while the number is so reduced, the person, who is
       the only partner of the LLP during the time that it so carries on business
       after those six months and has the knowledge of the fact that it is carrying
       on business with him alone, shall be liable personally for the obligations of
       the LLP incurred during that period.

Designated Partners [Section 7]

(1) Every LLP shall have at least two designated partners who are individuals
       and at least one of them shall be a resident in India.

       Provided, if in LLP, all the partners are bodies corporate or in which one or
       more partners are individuals and bodies corporate, at least two individuals
       who are partners of such LLP or nominees of such bodies corporate shall act
       as designated partners.

       Example 3: A LLP has three partners, one individual i.e. Mr. X and two
       bodies corporates viz. M/s XYZ Ltd and M/s ABC Ltd. In this case Mr. X and
       one nominee of any body's corporate shall be designated partners.

       Example 4: A LLP by the name SMY LLP has three partners namely 1. SI
       Limited, 2. MIS Limited, 3. YI Private Limited. As there is no individual as
       partner in LLP, nominees of any two said body corporates shall act as
       designated partners.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.13
                                           ACT, 2008

Resident in India: For the purposes of this section, the term "resident in
India" means a person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than
one hundred twenty days during the financial year.

       Example 5: There is a LLP by the name Indian Helicopters LLP having 5
       partners namely Mr. A (Non Resident), Mr. B (Non Resident) Ms. C (resident),
       Ms. D (resident) and Ms. E (resident). In this case, at least 2 should be
       named as Designated Partner out of which 1 should be resident. Hence, if
       Mr. A and Mr. B are designated then it will not serve the purpose. One of
       the designated partners should be there out of Ms. C, Ms. D and Ms. E.

2. (i) If the incorporation document

               (a) specifies who are to be designated partners, such persons shall
                       be designated partners on incorporation; or

               (b) states that each of the partners from time to time of LLP is to be
                       designated partners, every partner shall be a designated
                       partners;

       (ii) any partner may become a designated partner by and in accordance
               with the LLP Agreement and a partner may cease to be a designated
               partners in accordance with LLP agreement.

3. An individual shall not become a designated partner in any LLP unless he
       has given his prior consent to act as such to the LLP in such form and
       manner as may be prescribed.

4. Every LLP shall file with the Registrar the particulars of every individual who
       has given his consent to act as designated partners in such form and
       manner as may be prescribed within 30 days of his appointment.

5. An individual eligible to be a designated partner shall satisfy such
       conditions and requirements as may be prescribed.

6. Every designated partner of the LLP shall obtain a Designated Partner
       Identification Number (DPIN) from the Central Government and the
       provisions of sections 153 to 159 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall apply
       mutatis mutandis for the said purpose.
12.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Liabilities of Designated Partners [Section 8]

Unless expressly provided otherwise in this Act, a designated partner shall be--

(a) responsible for the doing of all acts, matters and things as are required to
       be done by the limited liability partnership in respect of
       compliance of the provisions of this Act including filing of
       any document, return, statement and the like report
       pursuant to the provisions of this Act and as may be
       specified in the limited liability partnership agreement; and

(b) liable to all penalties imposed on the limited liability partnership for any
       contravention of those provisions.

Changes in Designated Partners [Section 9]

A limited liability partnership may appoint a designated partner within 30 days of
a vacancy arising for any reason and provisions of sub-section (4) and sub-section
(5) of section 7 shall apply in respect of such new designated partner, provided
that if no designated partner is appointed, or if at any time there is only one
designated partner, each partner shall be deemed to be a designated partner.

Punishment for contravention of sections 7 and 9 [Section 10]

1. If the LLP contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 7
       (meaning that the number of designated partners are less than two or none
       of the designated partner is a resident in India), the LLP and its every
       partner shall be liable to a penalty of `10,000 and in case of continuing
       contravention, with further penalty of `100 per day subject to maximum
       `1,00,000 for LLP and `50,000 for every partner of such LLP.

2. If the LLP contravenes the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 7 (failure
       to file the consent of appointment of designated partner within 30 days of
       his appointment), the LLP and its every designated partner shall be liable to
       a penalty of `5,000 and in case of continuing contravention, with further
       penalty of `100 per day subject to maximum `50,000 for LLP and `25,000
       for every designated partner.

3. If the LLP contravenes the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 7 or
       section 9, the LLP and its every partner shall be liable to a penalty of
       `10,000 and in case of continuing contravention, with further penalty of
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.15
                                           ACT, 2008

`100 per day subject to maximum `1,00,000 for LLP and `50,000 for its
every partner.

    3. INCORPORATION OF LLP

Incorporation Document [Section 11]

The most important document needed for registration is the incorporation
document.

(1) For a LLP to be incorporated:

       (a) two or more persons associated for carrying on a lawful business with
               a view to earn profit shall subscribe their names to an incorporation
               document;

       (b) the incorporation document shall be filed in such manner and with
               such fees, as may be prescribed with the Registrar of the State in
               which the registered office of the LLP is to be situated (Incorporation
               documents are now processed electronically by Registrar, Central
               Registration Centre since 2nd October 2018); and

       (c) Statement to be filed:

                there shall be filed along with the incorporation document, a
                       statement in the prescribed form:

                       o made by either an advocate, or a Company Secretary or a
                               Chartered Accountant or a Cost Accountant, who is
                               engaged in the formation of the LLP and

                       o by any one who subscribed his name to the incorporation
                               document,

                       o that all the requirements of this Act and the rules made
                               thereunder have been complied with,

                       o in respect of incorporation and matters precedent and
                               incidental thereto.
12.16  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(2) The incorporation document shall--
       (a) be in a form as may be prescribed;
       (b) state the name of the LLP;
       (c) state the proposed business of the LLP;
       (d) state the address of the registered office of the LLP;
       (e) state the name and address of each of the persons who are to be
               partners of the LLP on incorporation;
       (f) state the name and address of the persons who are to be designated
               partners of the LLP on incorporation;
       (g) contain such other information concerning the proposed LLP as may
               be prescribed.

(3) If a person makes a statement as discussed above which he--
       (a) knows to be false; or
       (b) does not believe to be true,
               shall be punishable (Penalty for false declaration)
                with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 2 years and
                with fine which shall not be less than `10,000 but which may
                       extend to `5 Lakhs.

Incorporation by Registration [Section 12]

(1) When the requirements imposed by clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of
       section 11 have been complied with, the Registrar shall retain the
       incorporation document and, unless the requirement imposed by clause (a)
       of that sub-section has not been complied with, he shall, within a period of
       14 days--
       (a) register the incorporation document; and
       (b) give a certificate that the LLP is incorporated by the name specified
               therein.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.17
                                           ACT, 2008

(2) The Registrar may accept the statement delivered under clause (c) of sub-
       section (1) of section 11 as sufficient evidence that the requirement
       imposed by clause (a) of that sub-section has been complied with.

(3) The certificate issued under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be signed by
       the Registrar and authenticated by his official seal.

(4) The certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the LLP is incorporated by
       the name specified therein.

Registered Office of LLP and Change therein [Section 13]

(1) Every LLP shall have a registered office to which all
       communications and notices may be addressed and where
       they shall be received.

(2) A document may be served on a LLP or a partner or
       designated partner thereof by sending it by post under a
       certificate of posting or by registered post or by any other manner, as may be
       prescribed, at the registered office and any other address specifically declared
       by the LLP for the purpose in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

(3) A LLP may change the place of its registered office and file the notice of
       such change with the Registrar in such form and manner and subject to
       such conditions as may be prescribed and any such change shall take effect
       only upon such filing.

(4) If the LLP contravenes any provisions of this section, the LLP and its every
       partner shall be punishable with penalty of ` 500 per day subject to
       maximum ` 50,000.

Effect of registration [Section 14]

On Registration, LLP shall by its name, be capable of -

i. Suing and being sued;

ii. Acquiring, owning, holding and developing or disposing of property,
       whether movable or immovable, tangible or intangible;

iii. Having a common seal, if it decides to have one; and

iv. Doing and suffering other acts and things as bodies corporate may lawfully
       do and suffer.
12.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Name [Section 15]

(1) Every limited liability partnership shall have either
       the words "limited liability partnership" or the
       acronym "LLP" as the last words of its name.

(2) No LLP shall be registered by a name which, in the
       opinion of the Central Government is--

       (a) undesirable; or

       (b) identical or too nearly resembles to that of any other LLP or a
               company or a registered trademark of any other person under the
               Trade Marks Act, 1999.

Reservation of name [Section 16]

(1) A person may apply in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee
       as may be prescribed to the Registrar for the reservation of a name set out
       in the application as--

       (a) the name of a proposed LLP; or

       (b) the name to which a LLP proposes to change its name.

(2) Upon receipt of an application under sub-section (1) and on payment of the
       prescribed fee, the Registrar may, if he is satisfied, subject to the rules
       prescribed by the Central Government in the matter, that the name to be
       reserved is not one which may be rejected on any ground referred to in
       sub-section (2) of section 15, reserve the name for a period of 3 months
       from the date of intimation by the Registrar.

Rectification of name of LLP [Section 17]

1. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 15 and 16, if through
       inadvertence, or otherwise, the LLP, on its first registration or on its
       registration by new name, is registered by a name which is identical with or
       too nearly resembles to-

       (a) that of any other LLP or a company; or

       (b) a registered trade mark of a proprietor under the Trade Marks Act,
               1999
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.19
                                           ACT, 2008

       as likely to be mistaken, then on an application of such LLP or proprietor
       referred to in clauses (a) and (b) respectively or a company, the Central
       Government may direct such LLP to change its name or new name within a
       period of 3 months from the date of issue of such direction,

       Provided that an application of the proprietor of the registered trade marks
       shall be maintainable within a period of 3 years from the date of
       incorporation or registration or change of name of the LLP under this Act.

2. Where an LLP changes its name or obtains new name, it shall within a
       period of 15 days from the date of such change, give notice of the change
       to Registrar along with the order of the Central Government, who shall carry
       out necessary changes in the certificate of incorporation and within 30 days
       of such change in the certificate of incorporation, such LLP shall change its
       name in the LLP agreement.

3. If the LLP is in default in complying with any direction given under sub-
       section (1), the Central Government shall allot a new name to the LLP and
       the Registrar shall enter the new name in the register of LLP in place of the
       old name and issue a fresh certificate of incorporation with new name.

       Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall prevent a LLP from
       subsequently changing its name.

STEPS TO INCORPORATE LLP

Step1  Reservation of name of LLP: Applicant has to file e-Form
Step2  RUNLLP, for ascertaining availability and reservation of the name
Step3  of a LLP.

       File e- Form FiLLiP for incorporating a new LLP: contains the
       details of proposed LLP, details of partners/designated partners
       and their consent.

       Execution of LLP Agreement is mandatory as per Section 23 of
       Act. It will be filed in e-Form 3 within 30 days of incorporation
       of LLP.
12.20  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

    4. PARTNERS AND THEIR RELATIONS

Eligibility to be partners [Section 22]

On the incorporation of a LLP, the persons who subscribed their names to the
incorporation document shall be its partners and any other person may become a
partner of the LLP by and in accordance with the LLP agreement.

Relationship of partners [Section 23]

(1) Save as otherwise provided by this Act, the mutual rights
       and duties of the partners of a LLP, and the mutual rights
       and duties of a LLP and its partners, shall be governed by
       the LLP agreement between the partners, or between the
       LLP and its partners.

(2) The LLP agreement and any changes, if any, made therein shall be filed with
       the Registrar in such form, manner and accompanied by such fees as may
       be prescribed.

(3) An agreement in writing made before the incorporation of a LLP between
       the persons who subscribe their names to the incorporation document may
       impose obligations on the LLP, provided such agreement is ratified by all
       the partners after the incorporation of the LLP.

(4) In the absence of agreement as to any matter, the mutual rights and duties
       of the partners and the mutual rights and duties of the LLP and the partners
       shall be determined by the provisions relating to that matter as are set-out
       in the First Schedule.

Cessation of partnership interest [Section 24]

(1) A person may cease to be a partner of a LLP in accordance with an
       agreement with the other partners or, in the absence of agreement with the
       other partners as to cessation of being a partner, by giving a notice in
       writing of not less than 30 days to the other partners of his intention to
       resign as partner.

(2) A person shall cease to be a partner of a LLP--

       (a) on his death or dissolution of the LLP; or
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.21
                                           ACT, 2008

       (b) if he is declared to be of unsound mind by a competent court; or

       (c) if he has applied to be adjudged as an insolvent or declared as an
               insolvent.

(3) Where a person has ceased to be a partner of a LLP (hereinafter referred to
       as "former partner"), the former partner is to be regarded (in relation to any
       person dealing with the LLP) as still being a partner of the LLP unless--

       (a) the person has notice that the former partner has ceased to be a
               partner of the LLP; or

       (b) notice that the former partner has ceased to be a partner of the LLP
               has been delivered to the Registrar.

(4) The cessation of a partner from the LLP does not by itself discharge the
       partner from any obligation to the LLP or to the other partners or to any
       other person which he incurred while being a partner.

(5) Where a partner of a LLP ceases to be a partner, unless otherwise provided
       in the LLP agreement, the former partner or a person entitled to his share in
       consequence of the death or insolvency of the former partner, shall be
       entitled to receive from the LLP--

       (a) an amount equal to the capital contribution of the former partner
               actually made to the LLP; and

       (b) his right to share in the accumulated profits of the LLP, after the
               deduction of accumulated losses of the LLP, determined as at the date
               the former partner ceased to be a partner.

(6) A former partner or a person entitled to his share in consequence of the
       death or insolvency of the former partner shall not have any right to
       interfere in the management of the LLP.

Registration of changes in partners [Section 25]

(1) Every partner shall inform the LLP of any change in his name or address
       within a period of 15 days of such change.
12.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(2) A LLP shall--

       (a) where a person becomes or ceases to be a partner, file a notice with
               the Registrar within 30 days from the date he becomes or ceases to be
               a partner; and

       (b) where there is any change in the name or address of a partner, file a
               notice with the Registrar within 30 days of such change.

(3) A notice filed with the Registrar under sub-section (2)--

       (a) shall be in such form and accompanied by such fees as may be
               prescribed;

       (b) shall be signed by the designated partner of the LLP and
               authenticated in a manner as may be prescribed; and

       (c) if it relates to an incoming partner, shall contain a statement by such
               partner that he consents to becoming a partner, signed by him and
               authenticated in the manner as may be prescribed.

(4) If the LLP contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2), the LLP and every
       designated partner of the LLP shall be liable to penalty of `10,000.

(5) If any partner contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), such partner
       shall be `liable to penalty of `10,000.

(6) Any person who ceases to be a partner of a LLP may himself file with the
       Registrar the notice referred to in sub-section (3) if he has reasonable cause
       to believe that the LLP may not file the notice with the Registrar and in case
       of any such notice filed by a partner, the Registrar shall obtain a
       confirmation to this effect from the LLP unless the LLP has also filed such
       notice.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.23
                                           ACT, 2008

       However, where no confirmation is given by the LLP within 15 days, the
       registrar shall register the notice made by a person ceasing to be a partner
       under this section.

EXTENT AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY OF LLP AND PARTNER

Partner as agent [Section 26]: Every partner of a LLP is, for the purpose of
the business of the LLP, the agent of the LLP, but not of other partners.

Extent of liability of LLP [Section 27]

(1) A LLP, is not bound by anything done by a partner in dealing with a person
       if--

(a) the partner in fact has no authority to act for the LLP in doing a
       particular act; and

(b) the person knows that he has no authority or does not know or
       believe him to be a partner of the LLP.

(2) The LLP is liable if a partner of a LLP is liable to any person as a result of a
       wrongful act or omission on his part in the course of the business of the LLP
       or with its authority.

(3) An obligation of the LLP whether arising in contract or otherwise, shall be
       solely the obligation of the LLP.

(4) The liabilities of the LLP shall be met out of the property of the LLP.
Extent of liability of partner [Section 28]

(1) A partner is not personally liable, directly or indirectly for an obligation
       referred to in sub-section (3) of section 27 solely by reason of being a
       partner of the LLP.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (3) of section 27 and sub-section (1) of this
       section shall not affect the personal liability of a partner for his own
       wrongful act or omission, but a partner shall not be personally liable for the
       wrongful act or omission of any other partner of the LLP.
12.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Holding out [Section 29]

(1) Any person,

       · who by words spoken or written or by conduct,

       · represents himself, or knowingly permits himself to be represented to
               be a partner in a LLP

       · is liable to any person

       · who has on the faith of any such representation

       · given credit to the LLP, whether the person representing himself or
               represented to be a partner does or does not know that the
               representation has reached the person so giving credit.

       However,

       · where any credit is received by the LLP as a result of such
               representation,

       · the LLP shall,

       · without prejudice to the liability of the person so representing himself
               or represented to be a partner,

       · be liable to the extent of credit received by it or any financial benefit
               derived thereon.

(2) Where after a partner's death the business is continued in the same LLP
       name, the continued use of that name or of the deceased partner's name as
       a part thereof shall not by itself make his legal representative or his estate
       liable for any act of the LLP done after his death.

Unlimited liability in case of fraud [Section 30]

(1) In case of fraud:

       · In the event of an act carried out by a LLP, or any of its partners,

       · with intent to defraud creditors of the LLP or any other person, or for
               any fraudulent purpose,

       · the liability of the LLP and partners who acted with intent to defraud
               creditors or for any fraudulent purpose
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.25
                                           ACT, 2008

       · shall be unlimited for all or any of the debts or other liabilities of the
               LLP.

       However, in case any such act is carried out by a partner, the LLP is liable to
       the same extent as the partner unless it is established by the LLP that such
       act was without the knowledge or the authority of the LLP.

(2) Where any business is carried on with such intent or for such purpose as
       mentioned in sub-section (1), every person who was knowingly a party to
       the carrying on of the business in the manner aforesaid shall be punishable
       with

       · imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
               years and

       · with fine which shall not be less than ` 50,000 but
               which may extend to ` 5 Lakhs.

(3) Where a LLP or any partner or designated partner or employee of such LLP
       has conducted the affairs of the LLP in a fraudulent manner, then without
       prejudice to any criminal proceedings which may arise under any law for the
       time being in force, the LLP and any such partner or designated partner or
       employee shall be liable to pay compensation to any person who has
       suffered any loss or damage by reason of such conduct.

       However, such LLP shall not be liable if any such partner or designated
       partner or employee has acted fraudulently without knowledge of the LLP.

Whistle blowing [Section 31]

(1) The Court or Tribunal may reduce or waive any penalty leviable against any
       partner or employee of a LLP, if it is satisfied that--

       · such partner or employee of an LLP has provided useful information
               during investigation of such LLP; or

       · when any information given by any partner or employee (whether or
               not during investigation) leads to LLP or any partner or employee of
               such LLP being convicted under this Act or any other Act.

(2) No partner or employee of any LLP may be discharged, demoted,
       suspended, threatened, harassed or in any other manner discriminated
       against the terms and conditions of his LLP or employment merely because
12.26  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       of his providing information or causing information to be provided pursuant
       to sub-section (1).

CONTRIBUTIONS

Form of contribution [Section 32]

(1) A contribution of a partner may consist of tangible, movable
       or immovable or intangible property or other benefit to the
       limited liability partnership, including money, promissory
       notes, other agreements to contribute cash or property, and
       contracts for services performed or to be performed.

(2) The monetary value of contribution of each partner shall be accounted for
       and disclosed in the accounts of the limited liability partnership in the
       manner as may be prescribed.

Obligation to contribute [Section 33]

(1) The obligation of a partner to contribute money or other property or other
       benefit or to perform services for a limited liability partnership shall be as
       per the limited liability partnership agreement.

(2) A creditor of a limited liability partnership, which extends credit or
       otherwise acts in reliance on an obligation described in that agreement,
       without notice of any compromise between partners, may enforce the
       original obligation against such partner.

5. FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

1. Maintain proper books of account in presribed manner.

2. File Statement of Account and Solvency within 6 months from end
of each F.Y.
3. Statement of Account and Solvency shall be filed with the Registrar
every year in prescribed form and manner and with prescribed fees.

4. Audit of Accounts. Central Government may exempt.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.27
                                           ACT, 2008

Maintenance of books of account, other records and audit, etc.
[Section 34]

(1) Proper Books of account:
       · The LLP shall maintain such proper books of account as may be
               prescribed
       · relating to its affairs for each year of its existence
       · on cash basis or accrual basis and

· according to double entry system of accounting and

· shall maintain the same at its registered office

· for such period as may be prescribed.

(2) Statement of Account and Solvency:
       · Every LLP shall,
       · within a period of 6 months from the end of each financial year,
       · prepare a Statement of Account and Solvency
       · for the said financial year as at the last day of the said financial year

· in such form as may be prescribed, and

       · such statement shall be signed by the designated partners of the LLP.

(3) Every LLP shall file within the prescribed time, the Statement of Account and
       Solvency prepared pursuant to sub-section (2) with the Registrar every year
       in such form and manner and accompanied by such fees as may be
       prescribed.

(4) The accounts of LLP shall be audited in accordance with such rules as may
       be prescribed. However, the Central Government may, by notification in the
       Official Gazette, exempt any class or classes of LLP from the requirements of
       this sub-section.

(5) Penalty for non-compliance of provisions of sub-section 3-

       LLP ­ `100 per day subject to maximum `1,00,000

       Every Designated Partners - `100 per day subject to maximum `50,000.
12.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(6) Penalty for non-compliance of provisions of sub-section 1, 2 & 4 -
       LLP ­ not less than `25,000 which may extend to ` 5 Lakhs.
       Every designated partner ­not less than `10,000 which may extend to `1
       Lakh.

Accounting and auditing standards [Section 34A]

Central Government may, in consultation with the National Financial Reporting
Authority constituted under Section 132 of the Companies Act, 2013 --

(a) Prescribe the standards of accounting; and

(b) Prescribe the standards of auditing, as recommended by ICAI.
Annual Return [Section 35]

(1) Every LLP shall file an annual return duly authenticated with the Registrar
       within 60 days of closure of its financial year in such form and manner and
       accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.

       Example 6: Suppose, the financial year of a LLP closes on 31st March, 2022
       then the LLP has to file an annual return with the Registrar latest by 30th
       May, 2022.

       Note

       The LLP contra-distinct from Partnership Act, 1932 has prescribed the filing
       of Annual Return in accordance with Companies Act, 2013. This is a new
       feature of the LLPs.

(2) Penalty for non-filing of annual return ­
       LLP ­ `100 per day subject to maximum `1,00,000
       Every Designated Partners - `100 per day subject to maximum `50,000

INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS KEPT BY REGISTRAR [SECTION 36]

The incorporation document, name of partners and changes, if any, made therein,
Statement of Account and Solvency and annual return filed by each LLP with the
Registrar shall be available for inspection by any person in such manner and on
payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.29
                                           ACT, 2008

PENALTY FOR FALSE STATEMENT [SECTION 37]

If in any return, statement or other document required by or for the purposes of
any of the provisions of this Act, any person makes a statement--

(a) which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false; or

(b) which omits any material fact knowing it to be material,

he shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 2 years, and shall also be liable to
fine which may extend to 5 lakh rupees but which shall not be less than 1 lakh
rupees.

POWER OF REGISTRAR TO OBTAIN INFORMATION [SECTION 38]

(1) In order to obtain such information as the Registrar may consider necessary
       for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may
       require any person including any present or former partner or designated
       partner or employee of a limited liability partnership to answer any question
       or make any declaration or supply any details or particulars in writing to him
       within a reasonable period.

(2) In case any person referred to in sub-section (1) does not answer such
       question or make such declaration or supply such details or particulars
       asked for by the Registrar within a reasonable time or time given by the
       Registrar or when the Registrar is not satisfied with the reply or declaration
       or details or particulars provided by such person, the Registrar shall have
       power to summon that person to appear before him or an inspector or any
       other public officer whom the Registrar may designate, to answer any such
       question or make such declaration or supply such details, as the case may
       be.

(3) Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to comply with any summons
       or requisition of the Registrar under this section shall be punishable with
       fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend
       to twenty-five thousand rupees.

COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCES [SECTION 39]

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
       1973, the Regional Director or any other officer not below the rank of
12.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Regional Director authorised by the Central Government may compound
       any offence under this Act which is punishable with fine only, by collecting
       from a person reasonably suspected of having committed the offence, a
       sum which may extend to the amount of the maximum fine provided for the
       offence but shall not be lower than the minimum amount provided for the
       offence.

(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to an offence committed by
       a limited liability partnership or its partner or its designated partner within a
       period of three years from the date on which similar offence committed by
       it or him was compounded under this section.

       Explanation.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that any
       second or subsequent offence committed after the expiry of the period of
       three years from the date on which the offence was previously
       compounded, shall be deemed to be the first offence.

(3) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made to the
       Registrar who shall forward the same, together with his comments thereon,
       to the Regional Director or any other officer not below the rank of Regional
       Director authorised by the Central Government, as the case may be.

(4) Where any offence is compounded under this section, whether before or
       after the institution of any prosecution, intimation thereof shall be given to
       the Registrar within a period of seven days from the date on which the
       offence is so compounded.

(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any
       prosecution, no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence.

(6) Where the compounding of any offence is made after the institution of any
       prosecution, such compounding shall be brought by the Registrar in writing,
       to the notice of the court in which prosecution is pending and on such
       notice of the compounding of the offence being given, the offender in
       relation to which the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.

(7) The Regional Director or any other officer not below the rank of Regional
       Director authorised by the Central Government, while dealing with the
       proposal for compounding of an offence may, by an order, direct any
       partner, designated partner or other employee of the LLP to file or register,
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.31
                                           ACT, 2008

       or on payment of fee or additional fee as required to be paid under this Act,
       such return, account or other document within such time as may be
       specified in the order.

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if any partner or
       designated partner or other employee of the LLP who fails to comply with
       any order made by the Regional Director or any other officer not below the
       rank of Regional Director authorised by the Central Government, under sub-
       section (7), the maximum amount of fine for the offence, which was under
       consideration Regional Director or such authorised officer for compounding
       under this section shall be twice the amount provided in the corresponding
       section in which punishment for such offence is provided.

    6. ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF
          PARTNERSHIP RIGHTS

PARTNER'S TRANSFERABLE INTEREST [SECTION 42]

(1) The rights of a partner to a share of the profits and losses of the limited
       liability partnership and to receive distributions in accordance with the
       limited liability partnership agreement are transferable either wholly or in
       part.

(2) The transfer of any right by any partner pursuant to sub-section (1) does
       not by itself cause the disassociation of the partner or a dissolution and
       winding up of the limited liability partnership.

(3) The transfer of right pursuant to this section does not, by itself, entitle the
       transferee or assignee to participate in the management or conduct of the
       activities of the limited liability partnership, or access information
       concerning the transactions of the limited liability partnership.

    7. CONVERSION INTO LLP

Conversion from firm into LLP [Section 55]: A firm may convert into an LLP in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Second Schedule.
12.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Conversion from private company into LLP [Section 56]: A private company
may convert into an LLP in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the
Third Schedule.

Conversion from unlisted public company into LLP [Section 57]: An unlisted
public company may convert into an LLP in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and the Fourth Schedule.

Registration and effect of conversion [Section 58]

(i) The Registrar, on satisfying that a firm, private company or an unlisted
       public company, as the case may be, has complied with the respective
       Schedules, provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, register the
       documents submitted under such schedules and issue a certificate of
       registration in such form as the Registrar may determine stating that the LLP
       is, on and from the date specified in the certificate, registered under this
       Act.

(ii) The LLP shall, within 15 days of the date of registration, inform the
       concerned Registrar of Firms or Registrar of Companies, as the case may be,
       with which it was registered under the provisions of the Indian Partnership
       Act, 1932 or the Companies Act, 1956 (Now Companies Act, 2013) as the
       case may be, about the conversion and of the particulars of the LLP in such
       form and manner as may be prescribed.

(iii) Upon such conversion, the partners of the firm, the shareholders of private
       company or unlisted public company, as the case may be, the LLP to which
       such firm or such company has converted, and the partners of the LLP shall
       be bound by the respective Schedules, as the case may be, applicable to
       them.

(iv) Upon such conversion, on and from the date of certificate of registration,
       the effects of the conversion shall be such as specified in the respective
       schedules, as the case may be.

Effect of Registration: Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, on and from the date of registration specified in the
certificate of registration issued under the respective Schedule, as the case may
be,--
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.33
                                           ACT, 2008

(a) there shall be a LLP by the name specified in the certificate of registration
       registered under this Act;

(b) all tangible (movable or immovable) and intangible property vested in the
       firm or the company, as the case may be, all assets, interests, rights,
       privileges, liabilities, obligations relating to the firm or the company, as the
       case may be, and the whole of the undertaking of the firm or the company,
       as the case may be, shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited
       liability partnership without further assurance, act or deed; and

(c) the firm or the company, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be
       dissolved and removed from the records of the Registrar of Firms or
       Registrar of Companies, as the case may be.

FOREIGN LLP

Foreign limited liability partnerships [Section 59]

The Central Government may make rules for provisions in relation to
establishment of place of business by foreign LLP within India and carrying on
their business therein by applying or incorporating, with such modifications, as
appear appropriate, the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 or such regulatory
mechanism with such composition as may be prescribed.

8. COMPROMISE,  ARRANGEMENT                                        OR

RECONSTRUCTION OF LIMITED LIABILITY

PARTNERSHIPS

Compromise or arrangement of limited liability partnerships
[Section 60]

(1) Where a compromise or arrangement is proposed--

(a) between a limited liability partnership and its creditors; or

(b) between a limited liability partnership and its partners,

the Tribunal may, on the application of the limited liability partnership or of
any creditor or partner of the limited liability partnership, or, in the case of a
limited liability partnership which is being wound up, of the liquidator, order
a meeting of the creditors or of the partners, as the case may be, to be
12.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       called, held and conducted in such manner as may be prescribed or as the
       Tribunal directs.

(2) If a majority representing three-fourths in value of the creditors, or partners,
       as the case may be, at the meeting, agree to any compromise or
       arrangement, the compromise or arrangement shall, if sanctioned by the
       Tribunal, by order be binding on all the creditors or all the partners, as the
       case may be, and also on the limited liability partnership, or in the case of a
       limited liability partnership which is being wound up, on the liquidator and
       contributories of the limited liability partnership:

       Provided that no order sanctioning any compromise or arrangement shall
       be made by the Tribunal unless the Tribunal is satisfied that the limited
       liability partnership or any other person by whom an application has been
       made under sub-section (1) has disclosed to the Tribunal, by affidavit or
       otherwise, all material facts relating to the limited liability partnership,
       including the latest financial position of the limited liability partnership and
       the pendency of any investigation proceedings in relation to the limited
       liability partnership.

(3) An order made by the Tribunal under sub-section (2) shall be filed by the
       limited liability partnership with the Registrar within thirty days after making
       such an order and shall have effect only after it is so filed.

(4) If default is made in complying with the provisions of sub-section (3), the
       LLP and its every designated partner shall be `liable to a penalty of `10,000
       and in case of continuing default, with further penalty of `100 for each day
       after the first during which such default continues, subject to maximum
       `1,00,000 for LLP and `50,000 for every designated partner'.

(5) The Tribunal may, at any time after an application has been made to it
       under this section, stay the commencement or continuation of any suit or
       proceeding against the limited liability partnership on such terms as the
       Tribunal thinks fit, until the application is finally disposed of.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.35
                                           ACT, 2008

Power of Tribunal to enforce compromise or arrangement
(Section 61)

(1) Where the Tribunal makes an order under section 60 sanctioning a
       compromise or an arrangement in respect of a limited liability partnership,
       it--

       (a) shall have power to supervise the carrying out of the compromise or
               an arrangement; and

       (b) may, at the time of making such order or at any time thereafter, give
               such directions in regard to any matter or make such modifications in
               the compromise or arrangement as it may consider necessary for the
               proper working of the compromise or arrangement.

(2) If the Tribunal aforesaid is satisfied that a compromise or an
       arrangement sanctioned under section 60 cannot be worked satisfactorily
       with or without modifications, it may, either on its own motion or on the
       application of any person interested in the affairs of the limited liability
       partnership, make an order for winding up the limited liability partnership,
       and such an order shall be deemed to be an order made under section 64 of
       this Act.

Provisions for facilitating reconstruction or amalgamation of limited
liability partnerships [Section 62]

(1) Where an application is made to the Tribunal under section 60 for
       sanctioning of a compromise or arrangement proposed between a limited
       liability partnership and any such persons as are mentioned in that section,
       and it is shown to the Tribunal that--

       (a) compromise or arrangement has been proposed for the purposes of,
               or in connection with, a scheme for the reconstruction of any limited
               liability partnership or limited liability partnerships, or the
               amalgamation of any two or more limited liability partnerships; and

       (b) under the scheme the whole or any part of the undertaking, property
               or liabilities of any limited liability partnership concerned in the
               scheme (in this section referred to as a "transferor limited liability
               partnership") is to be transferred to another limited liability
               partnership (in this section referred to as the "transferee limited
12.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               liability partnership"), the Tribunal may, either by the order
               sanctioning the compromise or arrangement or by a subsequent
               order, make provisions for all or any of the following matters,
               namely:--

               (i) the transfer to the transferee limited liability partnership of the
                       whole or any part of the undertaking, property or liabilities of any
                       transferor limited liability partnership;

               (ii) the continuation by or against the transferee limited liability
                       partnership of any legal proceedings pending by or against any
                       transferor limited liability partnership;

               (iii) the dissolution, without winding up, of any transferor limited
                       liability partnership;

               (iv) the provision to be made for any person who, within such time
                       and in such manner as the Tribunal directs, dissent from the
                       compromise or arrangement; and

               (v) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as are
                       necessary to secure that the reconstruction or amalgamation
                       shall be fully and effectively carried out:

       Provided that no compromise or arrangement proposed for the purposes
       of, or in connection with, a scheme for the amalgamation of a limited
       liability partnership, which is being wound up, with any other limited liability
       partnership or limited liability partnerships, shall be sanctioned by the
       Tribunal unless the Tribunal has received a report from the Registrar that
       the affairs of the limited liability partnership have not been conducted in a
       manner prejudicial to the interests of its partners or to public interest:

       Provided further that no order for the dissolution of any transferor limited
       liability partnership under clause (iii) shall be made by the Tribunal unless
       the Official Liquidator has, on scrutiny of the books and papers of the
       limited liability partnership, made a report to the Tribunal that the affairs of
       the limited liability partnership have not been conducted in a manner
       prejudicial to the interests of its partners or to public interest.

(2) Where an order under this section provides for the transfer of any property
       or liabilities, then, by virtue of the order, that property shall be transferred
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                                          12.37
                                           ACT, 2008

       to and vest in, and those liabilities shall be transferred to and become the
       liabilities of, the transferee limited liability partnership; and in the case of
       any property, if the order so directs, freed from any charge which is, by
       virtue of the compromise or arrangement, to cease to have effect.

(3) Within thirty days after the making of an order under this section, every
       limited liability partnership in relation to which the order is made shall cause
       a certified copy thereof to be filed with the Registrar for registration.

(4) If default is made in complying with the provisions of sub-section (3), the
       LLP and its every designated partner shall be `liable to a penalty of `10,000
       and in case of continuing contravention, with further penalty of `100 for
       each day after the first during which such default continues, subject to
       maximum `1,00,000 for LLP and `50,000 for every designated partner'.

Explanation: (i) In this section "property" includes property, rights and powers of
every description; and "liabilities" includes duties of every description.

(ii) a LLP shall not be amalgamated with a company.

    9. WINDING UP AND DISSOLUTION

Winding up and dissolution [Section 63]: The winding up of a LLP may be
either voluntary or by the Tribunal and LLP, so wound up may be dissolved.

Circumstances in which LLP may be wound up by Tribunal [Section 64]: A LLP
may be wound up by the Tribunal:

(a) if the LLP decides that LLP be wound up by the Tribunal;

(b) if, for a period of more than six months, the number of partners of the LLP is
       reduced below two;

(c) if the LLP has acted against the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of
       India, the security of the State or public order1;

(d) if the LLP has made a default in filing with the Registrar the Statement of
       Account and Solvency or annual return for any five consecutive financial
       years; or

1 Omitted by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (w.e.f. 15.11.2016)
12.38  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(e) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the LLP be
       wound up.

Rules for winding up and dissolution [Section 65]: The Central Government
may make rules for the provisions in relation to winding up and dissolution of
LLP.

    10. MISCELLANEOUS

Business Transactions of Partner with LLP [Section 66]: A partner may lend
money to and transact other business with the LLP and has the same rights and
obligations with respect to the loan or other transactions as a person who is not a
partner.

Application of the Provisions of the Companies Act [Section 67]

(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct
       that any of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 specified in the
       notification--

       · shall apply to any LLP; or

       · shall apply to any LLP with such exception, modification and
               adaptation, as may be specified, in the notification.

(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1)

       · shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in
               session,

       · for a total period of 30 days which may be comprised in one session
               or in two or more successive sessions, and

       · if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
               or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
               disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in
               making any modification in the notification,

       · the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be,

       shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both
       the Houses.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                              12.39
                                           ACT, 2008

Payment of Additional Fee [Section 69]

Any document or return required to be registered or filed under this Act with
Registrar, if, is not registered or filed in time provided therein, may be registered
or filed after that time, on payment of such additional fee as may be prescribed in
addition to any fee as is payable for filing of such document or return:

Provided that such document or return shall be filed after the due date of filing,
without prejudice to any other action or liability under this Act:

Provided further that a different fee or additional fee may be prescribed for
different classes of limited liability partnerships or for different documents or
returns required to be filed under this Act or rules made thereunder.

Enhanced Punishment [Section 70]

In case a limited liability partnership or any partner or designated partner of such
limited liability partnership commits any offence, the limited liability partnership
or any partner or designated partner shall, for the second or subsequent offence,
be punishable with imprisonment as provided, but in case of offences for which
fine is prescribed either along with or exclusive of imprisonment, with fine which
shall be twice the amount of fine for such offence.

11. DIFFERENCES WITH OTHER FORMS OF
      ORGANISATION

Distinction between LLP and Partnership Firm: The points of distinction
between a limited liability partnership and partnership firm are tabulated as
follows:

Basis              LLP                                Partnership firm

1. Regulating Act  The Limited Liability The Indian Partnership Act,

                   Partnership Act, 2008.             1932.

2. Body corporate It is a body corporate.             It is not a body corporate,

3. Separate   legal It is a legal entity separate It is a group of persons
      entity
                   from its members.                  with no separate legal

                                                      entity.
                  12.40          CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS
4. Creation
5. Registration          It is created by a legal It is created by an
                         process called registration agreement between the
6. Perpetual             under the LLP Act, 2008. partners.
      succession
                         Registration is mandatory.    Registration is voluntary.
7. Name                  LLP can sue and be sued       Only the registered
                         in its own name.              partnership firm can sue
8. Liability                                           the third parties.

9. Mutual agency         The death, insanity,          The death, insanity,
10. Designated           retirement or insolvency      retirement or insolvency of
                         of the partner(s) does not    the partner(s) may affect its
      partners           affect its existence of LLP.  existence. It has no
11. Common seal          Members may join or           perpetual succession.
                         leave but its existence
                         continues forever.

                         Name of the LLP to            No guidelines. The partners
                         contain the word limited      can have any name as per
                         liability partners (LLP) as   their choice.
                         suffix.

                         Liability of each partner     Liability of each partner is
                                                       unlimited. It can be
                         limited to the extent to      extended up to the
                                                       personal assets of the
                         agreed  contribution          partners.

                         except in case of willful

                         fraud.

                         Each partner can bind the Each partner can bind the

                         LLP by his own acts but firm as well as other

                         not the other partners.       partners by his own acts.

                         At least two designated       There is no provision for
                         partners and at least one     such partners under the
                         of them shall be resident     Indian Partnership Act,
                         in India.                     1932.

                         It may have its common There is no such concept in
                         seal as its official partnership.
                         signatures.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.41
                                           ACT, 2008

12. Legal             Only designated partners        All partners are responsible
      compliances     are responsible for all the     for all the compliances and
                      compliances and penalties       penalties under the Act.
                      under this Act.

13. Annual filing of LLP is required to file:         Partnership firm is not

documents             (i) Statement                   of required to file any annual

                      accounts                 and document with the
                      solvency (to be filed registrar of firms.

                      annually)

                      (ii) Annual return with
                           the registration of LLP
                           every year.

14. Foreign           Foreign nationals can Foreign nationals cannot
      partnership     become a partner in a LLP. become a partner in a

                                                            partnership firm.

15. Minor as partner  Minor cannot be admitted        Minor can be admitted to
                      to the benefits of LLP.         the benefits of the
                                                      partnership with the prior
                                                      consent of the existing
                                                      partners.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN LLP AND LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY

Basis                 LLP                             Limited Liability Company

1. Regulating Act The LLP Act, 2008.                  The Companies Act, 2013.

2. Members/        The persons who contribute         The persons who invest the
      Partners     to LLP are known as partners       money in the shares are
                   of the LLP.                        known as members of the
                                                      company.

3. Internal        The internal governance            The internal governance
      governance   structure of a LLP is governed     structure of a company is
      structure    by contract agreement              regulated by statute (i.e.,
                   between the partners.              Companies Act, 2013).
          12.42   CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

4. Name           Name of the LLP to contain        Name of the public company
                  the word "Limited Liability       to contain the word "limited"
                  partnership" or "LLP" as suffix.  and Pvt. Co. to contain the
                                                    word "Private limited" as
                                                    suffix.

5. No.            of Minimum ­ 2 members            Private company:

members/          Maximum ­ No such limit on        Minimum ­ 2 members
partners          the members in the Act. The       Maximum 200 members
                  members of the LLP can be         Public company:
                  individuals/or body corporate

                  through the nominees.             Minimum ­ 7 members

                                                    Maximum ­ No such limit on
                                                    the members.

                                                    Members  can              be

                                                    organizations, trusts, another

                                                    business form or individuals.

6. Liability of Liability of a partners is Liability of a member is

members/          limited to the extent of limited to the amount unpaid

partners          agreed contribution in case of on the shares held by them.

                  intention is fraud.

7. Management     The business of the company       The affairs of the company
                  is managed by the partners        are managed by board of
                  including the designated          directors elected by the
                  partners authorized in the        shareholders.
                  agreement.

8. Minimum        Minimum 2 designated              Pvt. Co. ­ 2 directors
      number of   partners                          Public co. ­ 3 directors
      directors/
      designated
      partners
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.43
                                           ACT, 2008

SUMMARY

 Applicability: From 31st March, 2009 (Extends whole of India)

 Non- Applicability: The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 to LLPs.

 Who can be a partner in LLP: Any individual or body corporate may be a
       partner in a LLP. But not, person of unsound mind, undischarged insolvent;
       or who has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent.

 Minimum partners:

       1. Two partners.

       2. If LLP carries on business for more than 6 months with only one
               partner, he shall be liable personally for the obligations of the LLP
               incurred during that period.

 Designated Partners:

       1. At least two designated partners who are individuals and at least one
               of them shall be a resident in India.

       2. Resident in India: a person who has stayed in India for a period of not
               less than 120 days during the financial year.

 Registration of conversion to LLP

       1. Registrar, on satisfying, will register the documents and issue a
               certificate of registration.

       2. Information of conversion to Registrar of Firms or Companies by LLP,
               within 15 days from registration.

       3. Upon such conversion, provisions of LLP will be applicable.

 Effect of Registration of conversion

       1. There shall be a LLP by name specified in certificate of registration.

       2. All tangible (movable or immovable) and intangible property of firm
               or the company, shall vest in LLP 3. Firm or company shall be deemed
               to be dissolved.
12.44  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

 Name of LLP:
       1. Use of words "limited liability partnership" or "LLP" as the last
               words of its name.

       2. No LLP registration by a name which, in the opinion of the CG is--
               a) undesirable; or
               b) identical or too nearly resembles to any other partnership firm
                       or LLP or company or a registered trade mark.

 Change of name of LLP: If name of registered LLP is identical or too
       nearly resembles to any other partnership firm or LLP or company or a
       registered trade mark, CG may direct such LLP to change its name within
       3 months. (On Application)

 Extent & Limitation of Liability of LLP & Partner

       · Partner as agent: Agent of the LLP, but not of other partners.
       · Liability of LLP:

               1. LLP not bound by anything done by a partner if Partner has no
                       authority.

               2. Obligation of the LLP shall be solely the obligation of the LLP.
               3. Liabilities of LLP shall be met out of the property of LLP.

       · Liability of partner:
               1. Partner is not personally liable for obligations of the LLP.
               2. Partner is personally liable for his own wrongful act or omission

       · Unlimited liability in case of Fraud:
               1. If act carried out by a LLP or partner to defraud creditors, liability
                       of LLP and partners shall be unlimited.

               2. Penalty: imprisonment upto 5 years and fine of `50,000 to `5
                       Lakhs.

               3. Defaulted person also liable to pay compensation.
          THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                      12.45
                                                      ACT, 2008

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQ Based Questions

1. Which of the following cannot be converted into LLP?
       (a) Partnership firm
       (b) Private company
       (c) Listed company
       (d) Unlisted company

2. The approved name of LLP shall be valid for a period of ___ from the date of
       approval:
       (a) 1 Month
       (b) 2 Months
       (c) 3 months
       (d) 6 months

3. Name of the Limited Liability Partnership shall be ended by:
       (a) Limited
       (b) Limited Liability partnership or LLP
       (c) Private Limited
       (d) OPC

4. Which one of the following statements about limited liability partnerships
       (LLPs) is incorrect?
       (a) An LLP has a legal personality separate from that of its members.
       (b) The liability of each partner in an LLP is limited.
       (c) Members of an LLP are taxed as partners.
       (d) A listed company can convert to an LLP.

5. For the purpose of LLP, Resident in India means:
       (a) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 182 days
               during the current year.
12.46  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (b) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 180 days
               during the immediately preceding one year.

       (c) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 181 days
               during the immediately preceding one year

       (d) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 120 days
               during the financial year.

Descriptive Questions

1. "LLP is an alternative corporate business form that gives the benefits of
       limited liability of a company and the flexibility of a partnership". Explain.

2. Mr. Ankit Sharma wants to form a LLP taking him, his wife Mrs. Archika
       Sharma and One HUF as partners for that. Whether this LLP can be
       incorporated under LLP Act, 2008? Explain.

3. There is an LLP by the name Ram Infra Development LLP which has 4
       partners namely Mr. Rahul, Mr. Raheem, Mr. Kartar and Mr. Albert. Mr. Rahul
       and Mr. Albert are non ­ resident while other two are resident. LLP wants to
       take Mr. Rahul and Mr. Raheem as Designated Partner. Explain in the light of
       Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 whether LLP can do so?

4. Mr. Mudit is the creditor of Devi Ram Food Circle LLP. He has a claim of
       `10,00,000 against the LLP but the worth of the assets of LLP are only
       `7,00,000. Now Mr. Mudit wants to make the partners of LLP personally liable
       for the deficiency of `3,00,000. Whether by virtue of provisions of Limited
       Liability Act, 2008, Mr. Mudit can claim the deficiency from the partners of
       Devi Ram Food Circle LLP?

5. M/s Vardhman Steels LLP was incorporated on 01.09.2022. On 01.01.2023,
       one partner of a partnership firm named M/s Vardhimaan Steels is registered
       with Indian Partnership Act, 1932 since 01.01.2000 requested ROC that as the
       name of LLP is nearly resembles with the name of already registered
       partnership firm, the name of LLP should be changed. Explain whether M/s
       Vardhman Steels LLP is liable to change its name under the provisions of
       Limited Liability Act, 2008?

6. Kanik, Priyansh, Abhinav and Bhawna were partners in Singh Jain &
       Associates LLP. Abhinav resigned from the firm w.e.f. 01.11.2022 but this was
       not informed to ROC by LLP or Abhinav. Whether Abhinav will still be liable
       for the loss of firm of the transactions entered after 01.11.2022?
          THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                      12.47
                                                      ACT, 2008

ANSWERS

Answers to MCQ based Questions

1 (c) Listed company
2 (c) 3 months
3 (b) Limited Liability partnership or LLP
4 (d) A listed company can convert to an LLP
5 (d) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 120 days

               during the financial year

Answers to Descriptive Questions

1. LLP is an alternative corporate business form that gives the benefits of
       limited liability of a company and the flexibility of a partnership

       Limited Liability: Every partner of a LLP is, for the purpose of the business
       of LLP, the agent of the LLP, but not of other partners (Section 26 of the LLP
       Act, 2008). The liability of the partners will be limited to their agreed
       contribution in the LLP, while the LLP itself will be liable for the full extent of
       its assets.

       Flexibility of a partnership: The LLP allows its members the flexibility of
       organizing their internal structure as a partnership based on a mutually
       arrived agreement. The LLP form enables entrepreneurs, professionals and
       enterprises providing services of any kind or engaged in scientific and
       technical disciplines, to form commercially efficient vehicles suited to their
       requirements. Owing to flexibility in its structure and operation, the LLP is a
       suitable vehicle for small enterprises and for investment by venture capital.

2. Section 5 of Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 provides any individual
       or body corporate may be a partner in an LLP. However, an individual shall
       not be capable of becoming a partner of a LLP, if--

       (a) he has been found to be of unsound mind by a Court of competent
               jurisdiction and the finding is in force;

       (b) he is an undischarged insolvent; or

       (c) he has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is
               pending.
12.48  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Further, Section (2)(1)(d) provides that a Body Corporate it means a
       company as defined in `clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013
       and includes--

       (i) an LLP registered under this Act;

       (ii) an LLP incorporated outside India; and

       (iii) a company incorporated outside India,

       but does not include--

       (i) a corporation sole;

       (ii) a co-operative society registered under any law for the time being in
               force; and

       (iii) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined in `clause
               (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013' or a limited liability
               partnership as defined in this Act), which the Central Government may,
               by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.

       Therefore, HUF is not covered in the definition of body corporate and
       cannot be partner in LLP.

3. According to Section 7 of LLP Act, 2008 every LLP shall have at least two
       designated partners who are individuals and at least one of them shall be a
       resident in India. Further, explanation to the section provides, the term
       "resident in India" means a person who has stayed in India for a period of
       not less than one hundred twenty days during the financial year. Hence, in
       the given problem, Mr. Rahul and Mr. Raheem, can be appointed as
       designated partners.

4. A limited liability partnership is a body corporate formed and incorporated
       under this Act and is a legal entity separate from that of its partners. The
       LLP itself will be liable for the full extent of its assets but the liability of the
       partners will be limited. Creditors of LLP shall be the creditors of LLP alone.
       In other words, creditors of LLP cannot claim from partners. The liability of
       the partners will be limited to their agreed contribution in the LLP. Hence
       the creditors of Devi Ram Food Circle LLP are the creditors of Devi Ram
       Food Circle LLP only. Partners of LLP are not personally liable towards
       creditors. Mr. Mudit can not claim his deficiency of ` 3,00,000 from the
       partners of Devi Ram Food Circle LLP.
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP                     12.49
                                           ACT, 2008

5. Section 15 of LLP Act, 2008 provides no LLP shall be registered by a name
       which, in the opinion of the Central Government is--

       (a) undesirable; or

       (b) identical or too nearly resembles to that of any other `LLP or a
               company or a registered trade mark of any other person under the
               Trade Marks Act, 1999'.

       Further, section 17 provides, if the name of LLP is identical with or too
       nearly resembles to-

       (a) that of any other LLP or a company; or

       (b) a registered trade mark of a proprietor under the Trade Marks Act,
               1999

       then on an application of such LLP or proprietor referred to in clauses (a)
       and (b) respectively or a company, the CG may direct that such LLP to
       change its name within a period of 3 months from the date of issue of such
       direction.

       Following the above provisions, LLP need not change its name if its name
       resembles with the name of a partnership firm. These provisions are
       applicable only in case where name is resembles with LLP, company or a
       registered trade mark of a proprietor.

       Hence, M/s Vardhman Steels LLP need not change its name even it
       resembles with the name of partnership firm.

6. According to section 24(3), where a person has ceased to be a partner of a
       LLP (hereinafter referred to as "former partner"), the former partner is to be
       regarded (in relation to any person dealing with the LLP) as still being a
       partner of the LLP unless--

       (a) the person has notice that the former partner has ceased to be a
               partner of the LLP; or

       (b) notice that the former partner has ceased to be a partner of the LLP
               has been delivered to the Registrar.

       Hence, by virtue of the above provisions, as no notice of resignation was
       given to ROC, Abhinav will still be liable for the loss of firm of the
       transactions entered after 01.11.2022.
