CHAPTER  11

COMPANIES

INCORPORATED OUTSIDE

INDIA

                                         Learning Outcomes

After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
 Know the meaning of the Foreign Company and application

      of Act to it.
 Explain the provisions related to Accounts of Foreign

      company, service on foreign company.
 Comprehend the provisions of debentures, annual return,

      registration of charges, books of account and their inspection
      in Foreign companies.
 Analyse dating of prospectus and particulars to be contained
      therein, provisions as to expert's consent and allotment and
      registration of prospectus.
 Know about offer of Indian Depository Receipts.
 Merger or amalgamation of Company with foreign company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.2     CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

         Company incorporated outside India  Appllication of Act to Foreign Companies
                                                               (Section 379)

                                             Document to be delivered (Section 380)

                                                         Account ((Section 381)

                                               Dating and Registration of Prospectus
                                                         ((Section 387 and 389)

1. INTRODUCTION

Chapter  Consists of sections 379 to 393A as well as the Companies
XXII     (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014.

Foreign Company [Section 2(42)]: "Foreign company" means any company or
body corporate incorporated outside India which-

(a) has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an agent,
       physically or through electronic mode; and

(b) conducts any business activity in India in any other manner.

Example 1: ABC Entertainment Limited (Indian Company) having foreign subsidiary
UVW Limited rendering satellite services to the group will be covered under the
definition of Foreign Company under the Companies Act, 2013.

Example 2: Airline companies who operate through their booking agents in India
will be covered under the definition of Foreign Company under the Companies Act,
2013.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA  11.3

According to the 1Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014,
"electronic mode" means carrying out electronically based, whether main server
is installed in India or not, including, but not limited to ­

(a) business to business and business to consumer transactions, data
       interchange and other digital supply transactions;

(b) offering to accept deposits or inviting deposits or accepting deposits or
       subscriptions in securities, in India or from citizens of India;

(c) financial settlements, web based marketing, advisory and transactional
       services, database services and products, supply chain management;

(d) online services such as telemarketing, telecommuting, telemedicine,
       education and information research; and

(e) all related data communication services,

whether conducted by e-mail, mobile devices, social media, cloud computing,
document management, voice or data transmission or otherwise.

Explanation- For the purposes of this clause, electronic based offering of securities,
subscription thereof or listing of securities in the International Financial Services
Centres set up under section 18 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 shall not be
construed as `electronic mode' for the purpose of clause (42) of section 2 of the Act.

Example 3: Zakpak Ltd. is a shipping company incorporated in Japan. The Company
has set up a branch office in India after obtaining necessary approvals from RBI.
Branch Offices are generally considered as a reflection of the Parent Company's
office. Thus, branch offices of a company incorporated outside India are considered
as a place of business for conducting business activity in India and will be required
to follow provisions of this chapter and such other provisions as may be specified
elsewhere under Companies Act, 2013.

2Facts: Union Minister of State for Corporate Affairs Shri Rao Inderjit Singh in a
written reply to a question in Rajya Sabha stated that 320 foreign companies were
registered in India between 2018 and 2021.

1 Rule 2(1)(h) of the Companies (Specification of Definitions Details) Rule, 2014
2 Press release dated July 27, 2021 published by Press Information Bureau Delhi

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.4  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

     2. APPLICATION OF ACT TO FOREIGN
          COMPANIES [SECTION 379]

According to this section:
(i) Applicability of Act to foreign companies: Sections 380 to 386 (both
inclusive) and sections 392 and 393 shall apply to all foreign companies. It implies
that all companies which falls within the definition of foreign company as per
section 2(42), shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.

(ii) Requirement of holding of paid up share capital: Where not less than 50%
of the paid-up share capital, whether equity or preference or partly equity and
partly preference, of a foreign company incorporated outside India is held by:

(i) one or more citizens of India; or

(ii) by one or more companies or bodies corporate incorporated in India; or

(iii) by one or more citizens of India and one or more companies or bodies
       corporate incorporated in India,

whether singly or in the aggregate, such foreign company shall also comply with
the provisions of Chapter XXII and such other provisions of this Act as may be
prescribed with regard to the business carried on by it in India as if it were a
company incorporated in India. [Section 379(2)]

Note: Chapter XXII referred to above deals with the legal provisions for companies
incorporated outside India.

Example 4: The shareholding of Emaar Company LLC, incorporated in Dubai and
having a place of business in India, is as follows:

1. Hinduja Company Limited (Indian Company): 26%

2. Vaishali Company Limited (Indian Company): 25%

3. Citizens of Dubai: Remaining holding

As per section 379(2), Emaar Company LLC will also be required to comply with the
provisions of Chapter XXII as not less than 50% of the shareholders of Emaar
Company LLC consists of body corporates incorporated in India. Emaar Company
LLC will also be required to comply with other provisions of this Act as may be

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA  11.5

prescribed with regard to the business carried on by its place of business in India
as if it were a company incorporated in India.

     3. DOCUMENTS, ETC., TO BE DELIVERED TO
          REGISTRAR BY FOREIGN COMPANIES
          [SECTION 380]

According to section 380 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013,

(i) Every foreign company shall, within 30 days of the establishment of its place
       of business in India, deliver to the Registrar for registration:

       (a) a certified copy of the charter, statutes or memorandum and articles, of
               the company or other instrument constituting or defining the
               constitution of the company. If the instrument is not in the English
               language, a certified translation thereof in the English language;

       (b) the full address of the registered or principal office of the company;

       (c) a list of the directors and secretary of the company containing such
               particulars as may be prescribed;
               In relation to the nature of particulars to be provided as above, 3the
               Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014, provide
               that the list of directors and secretary or equivalent (by whatever name
               called) of the foreign company shall contain the following particulars,
               for each of the persons included in such list, namely:

               (1) personal name and surname in full;

               (2) any former name or names and surname or surnames in full;

               (3) father's name or mother's name or spouse's name;

               (4) date of birth;

               (5) residential address;

               (6) nationality;

3 Rule 3 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               (7) if the present nationality is not the nationality of origin, his
                       nationality of origin;

               (8) passport Number, date of issue and country of issue; (if a person
                       holds more than one passport then details of all passports to be
                       given)

               (9) income-tax permanent account number (PAN), if applicable;
               (10) occupation, if any;
               (11) whether directorship in any other Indian company, (Director

                       Identification Number (DIN), Name and Corporate Identity
                       Number (CIN) of the company in case of holding directorship);

               (12) other directorship or directorships held by him;

               (13) Membership Number (for Secretary only); and

               (14) e-mail ID.

       (d) the name and address or the names and addresses of one or more
               persons resident in India authorised to accept on behalf of the
               company service of process and any notices or other documents
               required to be served on the company;

       (e) the full address of the office of the company in India which is deemed
               to be its principal place of business in India;

       (f) particulars of opening and closing of a place of business in India on
               earlier occasion or occasions;

       (g) declaration that none of the directors of the company or the
               authorised representative in India has ever been convicted or debarred
               from formation of companies and management in India or abroad; and

       (h) any other information as may be prescribed.

(ii) Form, procedure and time for making application and submission of
       prescribed documents: According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign
       Companies) Rules, 2014, the above information shall be filed with the
       Registrar, Central Registration Centre within 30 days of the establishment

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA  11.7

       of its place of business in India, in Form FC-1 along with prescribed fees and
       documents required to be furnished as provided in section 380(1). The
       application shall also be supported with an attested copy of approval from
       the Reserve Bank of India under the Foreign Exchange Management Act or
       Regulations, and also from other regulators, if any, approval is required by
       such foreign company to establish a place of business in India or a
       declaration from the authorised representative of such foreign company that
       no such approval is required.

(iii) Office where documents to be delivered and fee for registration of
       documents:

       1. 4According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies)
               Rules, 2014, any document which any foreign company is required to
               deliver to the Registrar shall be delivered to the Registrar having
               jurisdiction over New Delhi.

               Provided that the documents for registration by a foreign company
               referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule (3) shall be delivered in
               Form FC-1 to the Registrar, Central Registration Centre.

       2. It shall be accompanied with the prescribed fees5.

       3. If any foreign company ceases to have a place of business in India, it
               shall forthwith give notice of the fact to the Registrar, and from the date
               on which such notice is so given, the obligation of the company to
               deliver any document to the Registrar shall cease, provided it has no
               other place of business in India.

(iv) Under section 380(2) every foreign company existing at the commencement
       of the Companies Act 2013, which has not delivered to the Registrar the
       documents and particulars specified in section 592(1) of the Companies Act,
       1956, it shall continue to be subject to the obligation to deliver those
       documents and particulars in accordance with the Companies Act, 1956.

(v) Form, procedure and time within which alteration in documents shall be
       intimated to Registrar: Section 380(3) provides that where any alteration is

4 Rule 8 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014
5 Rule 12 of the Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       made or occurs in the documents delivered to the Registrar under section
       380, the foreign company shall, within 30 days of such alteration, deliver to
       the Registrar for registration, a return containing the particulars of the
       alteration in the prescribed form. The Companies (Registration of Foreign
       Companies) Rules, 2014, has prescribed that the return containing the
       particulars of the alteration shall be filed in form FC-2 along with prescribed
       fees.

Illustration 1: Search & Find Pte. Ltd., incorporated in Singapore. The Company sells
its goods through electronic mode on the e-commerce platforms in India, however, it
does not have any branch or office in India. Is the Company required to submit the
documents as required under Section 380 of the Companies Act, 2013.

Answer: Yes, as per 2(42) of Companies Act, 2013, any company or body corporate
incorporated outside India which (a) has a place of business in India whether by
itself or through an agent, physically or through electronic mode; and (b) conducts
any business activity in India in any other manner shall be considered as a foreign
company. Accordingly, as Search & Find Pte. Ltd., is conducting its business through
electronic mode, it is considered a foreign company as per Companies Act, 2013
and is required to submit the documents mentioned under Section 380 of the
Companies Act, 2013.

     4. ACCOUNTS OF FOREIGN COMPANY
          [SECTION 381]

According to this section:
(i) Every foreign company shall, in every calendar year,--

       (a) make out a balance sheet and profit and loss account in such form,
               containing such particulars and including or having attached or
               annexed thereto such documents as may be prescribed, and

       (b) deliver a copy of those documents to the Registrar.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA  11.9

According to the 6Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
2014, every foreign company shall prepare financial statement of its Indian
business operations in accordance with Schedule III or as near thereto as
possible for each financial year including:

(1) documents that are required to be annexed should be in accordance
       with Chapter IX i.e. Accounts of Companies.

(2) The documents relating to copies of latest consolidated financial
       statements of the parent foreign company, as submitted by it to the
       prescribed authority in the country of its incorporation under the
       applicable laws there.

       Note: "financial year" in relation to any company or body corporate,
       means the period ending on the 31st day of March every year, and where
       it has been incorporated on or after the 1st day of January of a year, the
       period ending on the 31st day of March of the following year, in respect
       whereof financial statement of the company or body corporate is made
       up:

       Provided that where a company or body corporate, which is a holding
       company or a subsidiary or associate company of company
       incorporated outside India and is required to follow a different financial
       year for consolidation of its accounts outside India, the Central
       Government may, on an application made by that company or body
       corporate in such form and manner as may be prescribed, allow any
       period as its financial year, whether or not that period is a year.

       Provided further that any application pending before the Tribunal as on
       the date of commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Ordinance,
       2018, shall be disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the
       provisions applicable to it before such commencement.

       It is important to note that a foreign company having its place of
       business in India may not necessarily follow a financial year ending on
       the 31st day of March every year provided it has obtained the requisite
       approvals from the Central Government for the same.

6 Rule 4 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

           Example 5:

           ROK Limited, is a company incorporated outside India having a place of
           business in India. ROK Limited is a subsidiary of HOK Limited (Holding
           company), registered in Australia and is required to consolidate its
           accounts with HOK Limited. Accordingly, if HOK Limited is required to
           follow financial year other than 31st day of March every year, ROK can make
           an application to Central Government to follow the financial year as per
           HOK Limited.

(ii) The Central Government is empowered to direct that, in the case of any
       foreign company or class of foreign companies, the requirements of clause
       (a) given above shall not apply, or shall apply subject to such exceptions and
       modifications as may be specified in notification in that behalf [Section
       381(1)].

(iii) If any of the specified documents are not in the English language, a certified
       translation thereof in the English language shall be annexed. [Section 381 (2)]

(iv) Every foreign company shall send to the Registrar along with the
       documents required to be delivered to him, a copy of a list in the prescribed
       form, of all places of business established by the company in India as at the
       date with reference to which the balance sheet referred to in section 381(1)
       is made.

        7According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
       2014, every foreign company shall file with the Registrar, along with the
       financial statement, in Form FC-3 with such fee as provided under Companies
       (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014 a list of all the places of business
       established by the foreign company in India as on the date of balance sheet.

       According to the 8Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
       2014, if any foreign company ceases to have a place of business in India, it
       shall forthwith give notice of the fact to the Registrar, and as from the date
       on which notice is so given, the obligation of the company to deliver any

7 Rule 6 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014
8 Rule 8 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA  11.11

       document to the Registrar shall cease, if it does not have other place of
       business in India.
(v) According to the 9Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
       2014,

       (a) Further, every foreign company shall, along with the financial statement
               required to be filed with the Registrar, attach thereto the following
               documents; namely:-

               (1) Statement of related party transaction

               (2) Statement of repatriation of profits

               (3) Statement of transfer of funds (including dividends, if any)

               The above statements shall include such other particulars as are
               prescribed in the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
               2014.

       (b) All these documents shall be delivered to the Registrar within a period
               of 6 months of the close of the financial year of the foreign company
               to which the documents relate.

               Provided that the Registrar may, for any special reason, and on
               application made in writing by the foreign company concerned, extend
               the said period by a period not exceeding three months.

       Example 6: Mukesh & Jordan LLC is a foreign company and is required to file
       its financial statements within six months of the close of the financial year
       with Registrar on an annual basis alongwith following additional documents:

       (1) Statement of related party transaction

       (2) Statement of repatriation of profits

       (3) Statement of transfer of funds (including dividends, if any)

       However, where the Central Government has exempted or specified different
       documents for any foreign company or a class of foreign companies, then
       documents as specified shall be submitted.

9 Rule 4 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(vi) Audit of accounts of foreign company: According to the 10Companies
       (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014,

       (a) Every foreign company shall get its accounts, pertaining to the
               Indian business operations prepared in accordance with section
               381(1) and Rules thereunder, shall be audited by a practicing Chartered
               Accountant in India or a firm or limited liability partnership of practicing
               chartered accountants.

       (b) The provisions of Chapter X i.e. Audit and Auditors and rules made
               there under, as far as applicable, shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the
               foreign company.

     5. DISPLAY OF NAME, ETC., OF FOREIGN
          COMPANY [SECTION 382]

Every foreign company shall--

(a) conspicuously exhibit on the outside of every office or place where it carries
       on business in India, the name of the company and the country in which it is
       incorporated, in letters easily legible in English characters, and also in the
       characters of the language or one of the languages in general use in the
       locality in which the office or place is situate;

(b) cause the name of the company and of the country in which the company is
       incorporated, to be stated in legible English characters in all business letters,
       bill-heads and letter paper, and in all notices, and other official publications
       of the company; and

(c) if the liability of the members of the company is limited, cause notice of that
       fact--

       (i) to be stated in every such prospectus issued and in all business letters,
               bill-heads, letter paper, notices, advertisements and other official
               publications of the company, in legible English characters; and

10 Rule 5 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA                        11.13

(ii) to be conspicuously exhibited on the outside of every office or place
       where it carries on business in India, in legible English characters and
       also in legible characters of the language or one of the languages in
       general use in the locality in which the office or place is situated.

6. SERVICE ON                                      FOREIGN  COMPANY
     [SECTION 383]

Any process, notice, or other document required to be served on a foreign company
shall be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed to any person whose name
and address have been delivered to the Registrar under section 380 and left at, or
sent by post to, the address which has been so delivered to the Registrar or by
electronic mode.

7. DEBENTURES,                                     ANNUAL   RETURN,

REGISTRATION OF CHARGES, BOOKS OF

ACCOUNT AND THEIR INSPECTION

[SECTION 384]

(i) The provisions of section 71 (Issue of Debentures) shall apply mutatis
       mutandis to a foreign company.

(ii) The provisions of section 92 (Preparation and filing of Annual return) shall,
       subject to such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be made
       therein by rules made under this Act, apply to a foreign company as they
       apply to a company incorporated in India. Further, as per Rule 3 of the
       Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) Rules 2014, a foreign
       company which fulfils the criteria specified under Section 135(1) of the
       Companies Act 2013 is required to comply with Section 135 of the Companies
       Act, 2013, subject to such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may
       be made therein by rules made under this Act, apply to a foreign company as
       they apply to a company incorporated in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

        11According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
       2014, every foreign company shall prepare and file an annual return in Form
       FC-4 along with prescribed fees, within a period of 60 days from the last day
       of its financial year, to the Registrar containing the particulars as they stood
       on the close of the financial year.

(iii) The provisions of section 128 (Books of account, etc., to be kept by company)
       shall apply to a foreign company to the extent of requiring it to keep at its
       principal place of business in India, the books of account referred to in that
       section, with respect to monies received and spent, sales and purchases
       made, and assets and liabilities, in the course of or in relation to its business
       in India.

(iv) The provisions of Chapter VI (Registration of Charges) shall apply mutatis
       mutandis to charges on properties which are created or acquired by any
       foreign company.

(v) The provisions of Chapter XIV (Inspection, inquiry and investigation) shall
       apply mutatis mutandis to the Indian business of a foreign company as they
       apply to a company incorporated in India.

     8. FEE FOR REGISTRATION OF DOCUMENTS
          [SECTION 385]

There shall be paid to the Registrar for registering any document required by the
provisions of this Chapter to be registered by him, such fee, as may be prescribed.

12According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014, the
fees to be paid to the Registrar for registering any document relating to a foreign
company shall be such as provided in the Companies (Registration Offices and
Fees) Rules, 2014.

11 Rule 7 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014
12 Rule 8 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.15

     9. INTERPRETATION [SECTION 386]

For the purposes of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the expression:

(a) "Certified" means certified in the prescribed manner to be a true copy or a
       correct translation;

(b) "Director", in relation to a foreign company, includes any person in
       accordance with whose directions or instructions the Board of Directors of
       the company is accustomed to act; and

(c) "Place of business" includes a share transfer or registration office.

Illustration 2: Examine with reference to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013
whether the following companies can be treated as foreign companies:

(i) A company incorporated outside India having a share registration office at
       Mumbai.

(ii) Indian citizens incorporated a company in Singapore for the purpose of carrying
       on business there.

Answer: Section 2(42) of the Companies Act, 2013 defines a "foreign company" as
any company or body corporate incorporated outside India which:

(a) Has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an agent,
       physically or through electronic mode; and

(b) Conducts any business activity in India in any other manner.

According to section 386 of the Companies Act, 2013, for the purposes of Chapter
XXII of the Companies Act, 2013 (Companies incorporated outside India),
expression "Place of business" includes a share transfer or registration office.

Further, to qualify as a `foreign company' a company must have the following
features:

(a) it must be incorporated outside India; and

(b) it should have a place of business in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.16  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(c) That place of business may be either in its own name or through an agent or
       may even be through the electronic mode; and

(d) It must conduct a business activity of any nature in India.

       (i) Therefore, a company incorporated outside India having a share
               registration office at Mumbai will be treated as a foreign company
               provided it conducts any business activity in India.

       (ii) In the case of a company incorporated in Singapore for the purpose of
               carrying on business in Singapore, it will not fall within the definition of
               a foreign company. Its incorporation outside India by Indian
               citizen is immaterial. In order to be a foreign company it has to have a
               place of business in India and must also conduct a business activity in
               India.

10. DATING  OF                                     PROSPECTUS  AND

PARTICULARS TO BE CONTAINED THEREIN

[SECTION 387]

According to this section:

(i) Prospectus to be dated and signed [Section 387(1)]: No person shall issue,
       circulate or distribute in India any prospectus offering to subscribe for
       securities of a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India,
       whether the company has or has not established, or when formed will or will
       not establish, a place of business in India, unless the prospectus is dated and
       signed, and--

       (a) contains particulars with respect to the following matters, namely:--

(1) the instrument constituting or defining the constitution of the
       company;

(2) the enactments or provisions by or under which the incorporation
       of the company was effected;

(3) address in India where the said instrument, enactments or
       provisions, or copies thereof, and if the same are not in the English

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.17

                       language, a certified translation thereof in the English language
                       can be inspected;

               (4) the date on which and the country in which the company would
                       be or was incorporated; and

               (5) whether the company has established a place of business in India
                       and, if so, the address of its principal office in India; and

       (b) states the matters specified under section 26 (Matters to be stated in
               prospectus).

       Provided that points (1), (2) and (3) of point (a) above shall not apply in the
       case of a prospectus issued more than 2 years after the date at which the
       company is entitled to commence business.

       Example 7: Mir Company LLC, a company incorporated in Dubai, on 28th April
       2019. Mir Company LLC has established a place of Business in Mumbai in the
       year 2022. Now the place of business in India proposes to offer subscription
       to securities of Mir Company LLC. Now the place of business in India before
       going with the subscription will have to file a prospectus dated and signed
       and the prospectus shall not be required to contain the particulars mentioned
       in points (1), (2) and (3) of point (a) above as the prospectus will be getting
       issued after a period of more than 2 years since the Mir Company LLC has
       commenced its business.

(ii) No waiver of compliance in prospectus [Section 387(2)]: Any condition
       requiring or binding an applicant for securities to waive compliance with any
       requirement imposed by virtue of section 387(1) or purporting to impute him
       with notice of any contract, documents or matter not specifically referred to
       in the prospectus, shall be void.

       It is to be understood that section 387 (2) does not provides any exception
       with respect to the non-compliance of the requirements stated under section
       387 (1) by any person responsible for issuing or circulating prospectus.

(iii) Form of application for securities to be issued along with prospectus
       [Section 387(3)]: No person shall issue to any person in India a form of
       application for securities of such a company or intended company as is
       mentioned in section 387(1), unless the form is issued with a prospectus

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       which complies with the provisions of this Chapter (Chapter XXII) and such
       issue does not contravene the provisions of section 388:

       Exception: If it is shown that the form of application was issued in
       connection with a bona fide invitation to a person to enter into an
       underwriting agreement with respect to securities.

(iv) Section 387(4) further provides that the provisions of section 387--

       (a) shall not apply to the issue to existing members or debenture holders
               of a company of a prospectus or form of application relating to
               securities of the company, whether an applicant for securities will or
               will not have the right to renounce in favour of other persons; and

       (b) except in so far as it requires a prospectus to be dated, to the issue of
               a prospectus relating to securities which are or are to be in all respects
               uniform with securities previously issued and for the time being dealt
               in or quoted on a recognised stock exchange,

       but, subject as aforesaid, section 387 shall apply to a prospectus or form of
       application whether issued on or with reference to the formation of a
       company or subsequently.

       According to section 387(4), the provisions of section 387 shall not apply to
       the issue of prospectus or form of application relating to securities of the
       company to existing member or debenture holders of a company; and

       The provisions of section 387 shall not apply in respect of issue of
       prospectus dealing with offer for securities which are uniform in all respects
       with securities previously issued and such previously issued securities are
       listed on a recognised stock exchange. However, provisions relating to
       dating of prospectus shall continue to apply.

(v) Nothing in Section 387 shall limit or diminish any liability which any person
       may incur under any law for the time being in force in India or under the
       Companies Act, 2013 apart from Section 387.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.19

     11. PROVISIONS AS TO EXPERT'S CONSENT AND
          ALLOTMENT [SECTION 388]

According to this section:

(i) No person shall issue, circulate or distribute in India any prospectus offering
       for subscription in securities of a company incorporated or to be incorporated
       outside India, whether the company has or has not been established, or when
       formed will or will not establish, a place of business in India,--

       (a) if, where the prospectus includes a statement purporting to be made
               by an expert, he has not given, or has before delivery of the prospectus
               for registration withdrawn, his written consent to the issue of the
               prospectus with the statement included in the form and context in
               which it is included, or there does not appear in the prospectus a
               statement that he has given and has not withdrawn his consent
               as aforesaid; or

       (b) if the prospectus does not have the effect, where an application is made
               in pursuance thereof, of rendering all persons concerned bound by all
               the provisions of section 33 (Issue of application forms for securities)
               and section 40 (Securities to be dealt with in stock exchanges), so far as
               applicable.

(ii) For the purposes of this section, a statement shall be deemed to be included
       in a prospectus, if it is contained in any report or memorandum appearing on
       the face thereof or by reference incorporated therein or issued therewith.

     12. REGISTRATION OF PROSPECTUS [SECTION
          389]

According to this section:

No person shall issue, circulate or distribute in India any prospectus offering for
subscription in securities of a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside
India, whether the company has or has not established, or when formed will or will

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.20  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

not establish, a place of business in India, unless before the issue, circulation or
distribution of the prospectus in India;

 a copy thereof certified by the chairperson of the company and two other
       directors of the company as having been approved by resolution of the
       managing body has been delivered for registration to the Registrar; and

 the prospectus states on the face of it that a copy has been so delivered, and

 there is endorsed on or attached to the copy, any consent to the issue of the
       prospectus required by section 388 and such documents as may be
       prescribed.

14According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014, the
following documents shall be annexed to the prospectus, namely:

(a) any consent to the issue of the prospectus required from any person as
       an expert;

(b) a copy of contracts for appointment of managing director or manager and
       in case of a contract not reduced into writing, a memorandum giving full
       particulars thereof;

(c) a copy of any other material contracts, not entered in the ordinary course
       of business, but entered within preceding 2 years;

(d) a copy of underwriting agreement; and

(e) a copy of power of attorney, if prospectus is signed through duly authorized
       agent of directors.

14 Rule 11 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA  11.21

     13. OFFER OF INDIAN DEPOSITORY RECEIPTS
          [SECTION 390]

For the purposes of this section, and according to the 15Companies (Registration of
Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014, Indian Depository Receipts (IDR) means any
instrument in the form of a depository receipt created by a Domestic Depository in
India and authorized by a company incorporated outside India making an issue of
such depository receipts.

According to section 390, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the Central Government may make rules applicable for--

(i) the offer of Indian Depository Receipts (IDR);

(ii) the requirement of disclosures in prospectus or letter of offer issued
       in connection with IDR;

(iii) the manner in which the IDR shall be dealt with in a depository mode and by
       custodian and underwriters; and

(iv) the manner of sale, transfer or transmission of IDR,

by a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, whether the
company has or has not established, or will or will not establish, any place of
business in India.

According to Rule 13 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
2014, no company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, whether the
company has or has not established, or may or may not establish, any place of
business in India shall make an issue of Indian Depository Receipts (IDRs) unless it
complies with the conditions mentioned under this rule, in addition to the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue of Capital and Disclosure
Requirements) Regulations, 2009 and any directions issued by the Reserve Bank of
India.

15 Rule 13 of the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

The Rules relating to offer, disclosure requirements and manner of transfer, sale
etc., related to IDR are contained in Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies)
Rules, 2014.

Standard Chartered PLC was the first global company to file for an issue of IDR in
India in 2010.

Application of Chapter XV (Compromises, Arrangements and
Amalgamations): Section 234 of the Companies Act, 2013 deals with merger or
amalgamation of company with foreign company.

Section 234(1) states that the provisions of Chapter XV unless otherwise provided
under any other law for the time being in force, shall apply mutatis mutandis to
schemes or mergers and amalgamations between companies registered under this
Act and companies incorporated in the jurisdictions of such countries as may be
notified from time to time by the Central Government. Provided that the Central
Government may make rules, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, in
connection with mergers and amalgamations provided under this section.

Section 234(2) states that subject to the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force, a foreign company, may with the prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India,
merge into a company registered under this Act or vice versa and the terms and
conditions of the scheme of merger may provide, among other things, for the payment
of consideration to the shareholders of the merging company in cash, or in Depository
Receipts, or partly in cash and partly in Depository Receipts, as the case may be, as per
the scheme to be drawn up for the purpose.

Explanation: For the purposes of sub-section (2) above, the expression "foreign
company" means any company or body corporate incorporated outside India whether
having a place of business in India or not.

     14. APPLICATION OF SECTIONS 34 TO 36 AND
          CHAPTER XX [SECTION 391]

Section 391 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for Application of sections 34 to
36 and Chapter XX. According to this section:
According to sub-section (1), the provisions of sections 34 to 36 (both inclusive)
shall apply to--

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.23

(i) the issue of a prospectus by a company incorporated outside India under
       section 389 as they apply to prospectus issued by an Indian company;

(ii) the issue of IDR by a foreign company.

       Section 34 deals with criminal liability for mis-statements in prospectus.

       Section 35 deals with Civil Liability for mis-statement in prospectus.

       Section 36 deals with punishment for fraudulently inducing persons to invest
       money.

Sub-section (2) provides that, subject to the provisions of section 376 (Power to
wind up Foreign companies although dissolved), the provisions of Chapter XX (i.e.
Chapter on Winding up) shall apply mutatis mutandis for closure of the place of
business of a foreign company in India as if it were a company incorporated in India
in case such foreign company has raised monies through offer or issue of securities
under this Chapter which have not been repaid or redeemed.

15. PUNISHMENT FOR                                 CONTRAVENTION
     [SECTION 392]

Without prejudice to the provisions of section 391, if a foreign company
contravenes the provisions of Chapter XXII of the Companies Act, 2013 (i.e. Chapter
on Companies incorporated outside India), the foreign company shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than 1,00,000 rupees but which may
extend to 3,00,000 rupees and in the case of a continuing offence, with an
additional fine which may extend to 50,000 rupees for every day after the first
during which the contravention continues and every officer of the foreign company
who is in default shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than 25,000
rupees but which may extend to 5,00,000 rupees.

Thus, the punishment for contravention may be summed up as under:

1. Fine on defaulting foreign company in the range of 1 lac rupees to 3 lac
       rupees.

2. In case of continuing default an additional fine on the foreign company to
       the tune of 50,000 rupees per day after the first during which the
       contravention continues.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

3. Punishment for every officer of the foreign company who is in default shall
       be imposition of a fine of a minimum amount of 25,000 rupees, but which
       may extend to 5,00,000 rupees.

     16. COMPANY'S FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH
          PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER NOT TO
          AFFECT VALIDITY OF CONTRACTS, ETC
          [SECTION 393]

Any failure by a company to comply with the provisions of Chapter XXII of the
Companies Act, 2013, shall not affect the validity of any contract, dealing or
transaction entered into by the company or its liability to be sued in respect thereof.
However, the company shall not be entitled to bring any suit, claim any set-off,
make any counter-claim or institute any legal proceeding in respect of any such
contract, dealing or transaction, until the company has complied with the
provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, applicable to it.

     17. RULE 12 OF COMPANIES (REGISTRATION OF
          FOREIGN COMPANIES) RULES, 2014

Action for Improper Use or Description as Foreign Company: It states that if any
person or persons trade or carry on business in any manner under any name or title
or description as a foreign company registered under the Act or the rules made
thereunder, that person or each of those persons shall, unless duly registered as
foreign company under the Act and rules made thereunder, shall be liable for
investigation under section 210 of the Act and action consequent upon that
investigation shall be taken against that person.

     18. EXEMPTIONS UNDER THIS CHAPTER

The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class of-

(a) foreign companies;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.25

(b) companies incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, whether the
       company has or has not established, or when formed may or may not
       establish, a place of business in India,

in so far as they relate to the offering for subscription in the securities, requirements
related to the prospectus, and all matters incidental thereto in the International
Financial Services Centres set up under section 18 of the Special Economic Zones
Act, 2005.

SUMMARY

 Foreign company" means any company or body corporate incorporated
       outside India which-

       (a) has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an agent,
               physically or through electronic mode; and

       (b) conducts any business activity in India in any other manner.

 Every foreign company shall, in every calendar year,--

       (a) make out a balance sheet and profit and loss account in prescribed
               format, and

       (b) deliver a copy of those documents to the Registrar.

 The punishment for contravention is as under:

       1. Fine on defaulting foreign company in the range of 1 lac rupees to 3 lac
               rupees.

       2. In case of continuing default an additional fine on the foreign company
               to the tune of 50,000 rupees per day after the first during which the
               contravention continues.

       3. Punishment for every officer of the foreign company who is in default
               shall be imposition of a fine of a minimum amount of 25,000 rupees,
               but which may extend to 5,00,000 rupees.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.26  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Jackson Communications LLC, incorporated in Arizona, USA, has established a
       principal place of business at Kolkata, West Bengal. It is required to deliver
       requisite documents to the specified authority. You are required to select an
       appropriate option from the four given below which indicates the number of days
       within which such documents shall be delivered:

       (a) Jackson Communications LLC shall, within 10 days of the establishment of
               a principal place of business in India, deliver the requisite documents to the
               specified authority.

       (b) Jackson Communications LLC shall, within 15 days of the establishment of
               a principal place of business in India, deliver the requisite documents to the
               specified authority.

       (c) Jackson Communications LLC shall, within 30 days of the establishment of
               a principal place of business in India, deliver the requisite documents to the
               specified authority.

       (d) Jackson Communications LLC shall, within 45 days of the establishment of
               a principal place of business in India, deliver the requisite documents to the
               specified authority.

2. Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH incorporated in Berlin, Germany, established a
       place of business at Mumbai to conduct its business of data interchange and other
       digital supply transactions online. However, Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH failed
       to deliver certain documents to the jurisdictional Registrar of Companies within
       the prescribed time period in compliance with the respective statutory provisions.
       Which option, out of the four given below, shall correctly indicate the amount of
       fine with which Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH shall be punishable for its failure
       to deliver certain documents:

       (a) Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH is punishable with fine which shall not be
               less than 50,000 rupees but which may extend to 5,00,000 rupees and in the
               case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine upto 25,000 rupees for
               every day after the first during which the contravention continues.

       (b) Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH is punishable with fine which shall not be
               less than 1,00,000 rupees but which may extend to 5,00,000 rupees and in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.27

               the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine upto 20,000 rupees
               for every day after the first during which the contravention continues.

       (c) Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH is punishable with fine which shall not be
               less than 2,00,000 rupees but which may extend to 5,00,000 rupees and in
               the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine upto 50,000 rupees
               for every day after the first during which the contravention continues.

       (d) Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH is punishable with fine which shall not be
               less than 1,00,000 rupees but which may extend to 3,00,000 rupees and in
               the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine upto 50,000 rupees
               for every day after the first during which the contravention continues.

3. Radix Healthcare Ltd., a company registered in Thailand, although has no place of
       business established in India, yet it is engaged in online business through remote
       delivery of healthcare services in India. Select the incorrect statement from those
       given below as to the nature of the Radix Healthcare Ltd. in the light of the
       applicable provisions of the Companies Act, 2013:

       (a) Radix Healthcare Ltd. is not a foreign company as it has no place of business
               established in India.

       (b) Radix Healthcare Ltd. is a foreign company being involved in business
               activity through telemedicine.

       (c) Radix Healthcare Ltd. is a foreign company for conducting business through
               electronic mode.

       (d) Radix Healthcare Ltd. is a foreign company as it conducts business activity
               in India.

4. 5K Cosmetic Shop plc., a company incorporated in Switzerland, is involved in
       digital supply services through electronic mode, the server of which is located
       outside India. The company follows calendar year as its financial year. Every year
       the company is required to prepare a balance sheet and profit and loss account.
       You are required to choose the correct timeline within which such documents shall
       be filed with the Registrar of Companies considering the provisions of Chapter XXII
       of the Companies Act, 2013:

       (a) Within a period of 30 days from the close of the financial year of 5K Cosmetic
               Shop plc.

       (b) Within a period of 3 months from the close of the financial year of 5K
               Cosmetic Shop plc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (c) Within a period of 60 days from the close of the financial year of 5K Cosmetic
               Shop plc.

       (d) Within a period of 6 months from the close of the financial year of 5K
               Cosmetic Shop plc.

Descriptive Questions

1. (i) ABC Ltd., a foreign company having its Indian principal place of business
               at Kolkata, West Bengal is required to deliver various documents to
               Registrar of Companies under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.
               You are required to state, where the said company should deliver such
               documents.

       (ii) In case, a foreign company does not deliver its documents to the Registrar
               of Companies as required under section 380 of the Companies Act, 2013,
               state the penalty prescribed under the said Act, which can be levied

2. DEJY is a Company Limited incorporated in Singapore desires to establish a
       branch office at Mumbai. You being a practicing Chartered Accountant have
       been appointed by the company as a liaison officer for compliance of legal
       formalities on behalf of the company. Examining the provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013,answer the following:

       (i) Whether branch office will be considered as a company incorporated
               outside India.

       (ii) If yes, state the documents you are required to furnish on behalf of the
               company, on the establishment of a branch office at Mumbai.

3. Galilio Ltd. is a foreign company in Germany, and it has established a place of
       business in Mumbai. Explain the relevant provisions of the Companies Act, 2013
       and rules made thereunder relating to preparation and filing of financial
       statements, as also the documents to be attached alongwith the financial
       statements by the foreign company.

4. In the light of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, examine whether the
       following Companies can be considered as a 'Foreign Company':

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.29

       (i) Red Stone Limited is a Company registered in Singapore. The Board of
               Directors meets and executes business decisions at their Board Meeting
               held in India.

       (ii) Xen Limited Liability Company registered in Dubai has installed its main
               server in Dubai for maintaining office automation software by Cloud
               Computing for its client in India.

5. Abroad Ltd., a foreign company without establishing a place of business in
       India, proposes to issue prospectus for subscription of securities in India. Being
       a consultant of the company, advise on the procedure of such an issue of
       prospectus by Abroad Ltd.

6. Jackson & Jackson LLC, incorporated in Germany, is proposing to establish a
       business in Mumbai, India. Its official documents are in German language.
       Whether Jackson & Jackson LLC can file the required documents with Registrar
       in the same language.

7. Swift Pharmaceuticals, a Company registered in Singapore, has started its
       business in India during the financial year 2016. The Company has submitted
       all the required documents with registrar within the due date. On March 1,
       2024, Swift Pharmaceuticals has shifted its principal office in Singapore. Does
       the Company required to undertake any steps due to change in address of
       principal office.

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.       (c) Jackson Communications LLC shall, within 30 days of the

         establishment of a principal place of business in India,

         deliver the requisite documents to the specified authority.

2.       (d) Morgen Stern Digi Cables GmbH is punishable with fine

         which shall not be less than 1,00,000 rupees but which may

         extend to 3,00,000 rupees and in the case of a continuing

         offence, with an additional fine upto 50,000 rupees for

         every day after the first during which the contravention

         continues.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

3.     (a) Radix Healthcare Ltd. is not a foreign company as it has no

       place of business established in India.

4.     (d) Within a period of 6 months from the close of the financial

       year of 5K Cosmetic Shop plc.

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. (i) The Companies Act, 2013 vide section 380 state that every foreign
               company is required to deliver to the Registrar for registration, within
               30 days of the establishment of office in India, documents which have
               been specified therein. According to the Companies (Registration of
               Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014, any document which any foreign
               company is required to deliver to the Registrar shall be delivered to the
               Registrar having jurisdiction over New Delhi.

       (ii) The Companies Act, 2013 lays down the governing provisions for
               foreign companies in Chapter XXII which is comprised of sections 379
               to 393. The penalties for non- filing or for contravention of any
               provision for this chapter including for non-filing of documents with the
               Registrar as required by section 380 and other sections in this chapter
               are laid down in section 392 of the Act which provides that if a foreign
               company contravenes the provisions of this Chapter, the foreign
               company shall be punishable with a fine which shall not be less than
               1,00,000 but which may extend to 3,00,000 and in the case of a
               continuing offence, with an additional fine which may extend to 50,000
               for every day after the first during which the contravention continues
               and every officer of the foreign company who is in default shall be
               punishable with fine which shall not be less than 25,000 but which may
               extend to 5,00,000.

2. (i) According to section 2(42) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Foreign
               company" means any company or body corporate incorporated outside
               India which-

               (a) has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an
                       agent, physically or through electronic mode; and

               (b) conducts any business activity in India in any other manner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.31

       Further, branch offices are generally considered as reflection of the
       Parent Company' office. Thus, branch offices of a company incorporated
       outside India are considered as a place of business for conducting
       business activity in India and will be required to follow provisions of this
       chapter and such other provisions as may be specified elsewhere under
       Companies Act, 2013.

(ii) Under section 380(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 every foreign
       company shall, within 30 days of the establishment of place of business
       in India, deliver to the Registrar for registration the following
       documents:

       (a) a certified copy of the charter, statutes or memorandum and
               articles, of the company or other instrument constituting or
               defining the constitution of the company. If the instruments are
               not in the English language, a certified translation thereof in the
               English language;

       (b) the full address of the registered or principal office of the
               company;

       (c) a list of the directors and secretary of the company containing
               such particulars as may be prescribed;

       In relation to the nature of particulars to be provided as above, the
       Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014, provide that
       the list of directors and secretary or equivalent (by whatever name called)
       of the foreign company shall contain the following particulars, for each of
       the persons included in such list, namely:

       (1) personal name and surname in full;

       (2) any former name or names and surname or surnames in full;

       (3) father's name or mother's name or spouse's name;

       (4) date of birth;

       (5) residential address;

       (6) nationality;

       (7) if the present nationality is not the nationality of origin, his
               nationality of origin;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (8) passport Number, date of issue and country of issue; (if a person
               holds more than one passport then details of all passports to be
               given)

       (9) income-tax permanent account number (PAN), if applicable;

       (10) occupation, if any;

       (11) whether directorship in any other Indian company, (Director
               Identification Number (DIN), Name and Corporate Identity
               Number (CIN) of the company in case of holding directorship);

       (12) other directorship or directorships held by him;

       (13) Membership Number (for Secretary only); and

       (14) e-mail ID.

(d) the name and address or the names and addresses of one or more
       persons resident in India authorised to accept on behalf of the company
       service of process and any notices or other documents required to be
       served on the company;

(e) the full address of the office of the company in India which is deemed
       to be its principal place of business in India;

(f) particulars of opening and closing of a place of business in India on
       earlier occasion or occasions;

(g) declaration that none of the directors of the company or the authorised
       representative in India has ever been convicted or debarred from
       formation of companies and management in India or abroad; and

(h) any other information as may be prescribed.

According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014,
any document which any foreign company is required to deliver to the
Registrar shall be delivered to the Registrar having jurisdiction over New
Delhi.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.33

3. Preparation and filing of financial statements by a foreign company:

       According to section 381 of the Companies Act, 2013:

       (i) Every foreign company shall, in every calendar year,--

               (a) make out a balance sheet and profit and loss account in such
                       form, containing such particulars and including or having
                       attached or annexed thereto such documents as may be
                       prescribed, and

               (b) deliver a copy of those documents to the Registrar.

               According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
               2014, every foreign company shall prepare financial statement of its
               Indian business operations in accordance with Schedule III or as near
               thereto as possible for each financial year including:

               (1) documents that are required to be annexed should be in
                       accordance with Chapter IX i.e. Accounts of Companies.

               (2) The documents relating to copies of latest consolidated financial
                       statements of the parent foreign company, as submitted by it to
                       the prescribed authority in the country of its incorporation under
                       the applicable laws there.

       (ii) The Central Government is empowered to direct that, in the case of any
               foreign company or class of foreign companies, the requirements of
               clause (a) of section 381(1) shall not apply, or shall apply subject to such
               exceptions and modifications as may be specified in notification in that
               behalf.

       (iii) If any of the specified documents are not in the English language, a
               certified translation thereof in the English language shall be annexed.
               [Section 381 (2)]

       (iv) Every foreign company shall send to the Registrar along with the
               documents required to be delivered to him, a copy of a list in the
               prescribed form, of all places of business established by the company
               in India as at the date with reference to which the balance sheet referred
               to in section 381(1) is made.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
               2014, every foreign company shall file with the Registrar, along with the
               financial statement, in Form FC-3 with such fee as provided under
               Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014 a list of all the
               places of business established by the foreign company in India as on
               the date of balance sheet.

               According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
               2014, if any foreign company ceases to have a place of business in India,
               it shall forthwith give notice of the fact to the Registrar, and as from the
               date on which notice is so given, the obligation of the company to
               deliver any document to the Registrar shall cease, if it does not have
               other place of business in India.

       (v) According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules,
               2014,

               (a) Further, every foreign company shall, along with the financial
                       statement required to be filed with the Registrar, attach thereto
                       the following documents; namely:-

                       (1) Statement of related party transaction

                       (2) Statement of repatriation of profits

                       (3) Statement of transfer of funds (including dividends, if any)

                       The above statements shall include such other particulars as
                       are prescribed in the Companies (Registration of Foreign
                       Companies) Rules, 2014.

               (b) All these documents shall be delivered to the Registrar within a
                       period of 6 months of the close of the financial year of the foreign
                       company to which the documents relate.

4. According to section 2(42) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Foreign company"
       means any company or body corporate incorporated outside India which-

       (a) has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an agent,
               physically or through electronic mode; and

       (b) conducts any business activity in India in any other manner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA               11.35

       According to the Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014,
       "electronic mode" means carrying out electronically based, whether main
       server is installed in India or not, including, but not limited to-

       (a) business to business and business to consumer transactions, data
               interchange and other digital supply transactions;

       (b) offering to accept deposits or inviting deposits or accepting deposits or
               subscriptions in securities, in India or from citizens of India;

       (c) financial settlements, web-based marketing, advisory and transactional
               services, database services and products, supply chain management;

       (d) online services such as telemarketing, telecommuting, telemedicine,
               education and information research; and

       (e) all related data communication services,

       Whether conducted by e-mail, mobile devices, social media, cloud computing,
       document management, voice or data transmission or otherwise.

       (i) In the given situation, Red Stone Limited is registered in Singapore.
              However, it does not have a place of business in India whether by itself
              or through an agent, physically or through electronic mode; and does
              not conduct any business activity in India in any other manner. Mere
              holding of board meetings and executing business decisions in India
              cannot be termed as conducting business activity in India. Hence, M/s
              Red Stone Limited is not a foreign company as per the Companies Act,
              2013.

       (ii) In the given situation, Xen Limited Liability Company is registered in
              Dubai and has installed its main server in Dubai for maintaining office
              automation software by Cloud Computing for its client in India. Thus, it
              can be said that M/s Xen Limited Liability Company has a place of
              business in India through electronic mode and is conducting business
              activity in India. Hence, Xen Limited Liability Company is a foreign
              company as per the Companies Act, 2013.

5. As per section 389 of the Companies Act, 2013, no person shall issue, circulate
       or distribute in India any prospectus offering for subscription in securities of
       a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, whether the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

        company has or has not established, or when formed will or will not establish,
        a place of business in India, unless before the issue, circulation or distribution
        of the prospectus in India, a copy thereof certified by the chairperson of the
        company and two other directors of the company as having been approved
        by resolution of the managing body has been delivered for registration to the
        Registrar and the prospectus states on the face of it that a copy has been so
        delivered, and there is endorsed on or attached to the copy, any consent to
        the issue of the prospectus required by section 388 and such documents as
        may be prescribed under Rule 11 of the Companies (Incorporated outside
        India) Rules, 2014.

        Accordingly, the Abroad Ltd. a foreign company shall proceed with the issue
        of prospectus in compliance with the above stated provisions of section 379
        of the Act.

6. Every foreign company shall, within 30 days of the establishment of its place
       of business in India, deliver the documents to the Registrar as per Section 380
       of the Companies Act, 2013. Further, if the original instruments/ documents
       are not in the English language, a certified translation in the English language
       is required for the same and submitted to Registrar.

7. Section 380 (3) provides that where any alteration is made or occurs in the
       documents delivered to the Registrar under section 380, the foreign company
       shall, within 30 days of such alteration, deliver to the Registrar for registration,
       a return containing the particulars of the alteration in the prescribed form.
       The Companies (Registration of Foreign Companies) Rules, 2014, has
       prescribed that the return containing the particulars of the alteration shall be
       filed in form FC-2 along with prescribed fees. Accordingly, Swift
       Pharmaceuticals is required to submit the full address of the new registered
       or principal office of the company by March 30, 2024.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
