CHAPTER  9

ACCOUNTS OF
COMPANIES

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:

 Gain knowledge about preparation and maintenance of
       books of account etc. to be kept by company.

 Identify the provisions as to preparation and filing of
       financial statements and other related matters.

 Explain about the re-opening and revision of financial
       statements.

 Gain knowledge about constitution, working and power of
       National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA).

 Comprehend various concepts related to Corporate Social
       Responsibility (CSR).

 Explain procedure related to internal audit of companies.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                         9.2  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

   

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

This chapter explains the provisions of Chapter IX of the Companies Act, 2013
(hereinafter also referred to as "the Act" or "this Act"), consisting of sections 128 to
138 dealing with the accounts of companies. Chapter will also explain procedural
aspects described in relevant rules notified in this context. Following diagram
depicts the arrangement of relevant sections.

                              Types of accounts to be        Books of account
                                      maintained       Relevant books and papers

                               (Section 128 and 129)        Financial statement

Accounts of Companies               Periodical Financial Results (Section 129A)
     (Section 128- 138)
                              Re-opening and recasting of accounts on Court's or
                                           Tribunal's Orders (Section 130)

                              Voluntary revision of accounts (Section 131)

                              Constitution of NFRA & power of CG to prescribe
                                   accounting standards (Section 132- 133)

                              Financial Statements, Board reports,etc (Section 134)

                              Corporate Social Responsibility (Section 135)

                              Right of members & Filing of Financial statement with
                                               Registrar (Section 136- 137)

                                               Internal Audit (Section 138)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                    9.3

     1. INTRODUCTION

   Chapter IX Consists of sections 128 to 138 as well as the Companies
                      (Accounts) Rules, 2014.

Directors who are agents of shareholders and acting in fiduciary capacity, required
to report in order to disclose financial results (financial performance and position
through financial results) to shareholders so that the shareholders remain aware of
the working and affairs of the company. As stated earlier also, chapter IX of the
Companies Act, 2013, lays down various provisions related to maintenance of
proper books of account of the companies and allied aspects that are explained in
this chapter.

     2. BOOKS OF ACCOUNT, ETC., TO BE KEPT BY
          COMPANY [SECTION 128]

                                    Company shall prepare

Books of account  Books and papers                 Financial statement

Keep at its registered office/any other place in India as
         the Board of Directors (BOD) may decide

             Open for inspection by directors

  Inspection of    Preserved for 8 years              Other
     Books of      Failure in compliance             financial
                  Fine (` 50,000 to 5 lakh)        information
 account of the                                      outside
 subsidiary by a                                     India-on
person -Only on                                       written
authorisation by                                   request by
BOD's resolution                                     director

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.4  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Every company shall prepare books of account and other relevant books and
records and financial statement for every financial year.

Note:

(Despite these definition clauses already covered in chapter 1, a quick
reference shall be handy to recapitulate)

1. As defined in Section 2(13) of the Act, the "books of account" includes
       records maintained in respect of

        All sums of money received and expended by a company and matters
               in relation to which the receipts and expenditure take place;

        All sales and purchases of goods and services by the company;

        The assets and liabilities of the company; and

        The items of cost as may be prescribed under section 148 (Cost Audit)
               of the Companies Act, 2013 ("Act") in the case of a company which
               belongs to any class of companies specified under that section.

2. As per section 2(12) of this Act, the "book and paper" and "book or paper"
       include books of account, deeds, vouchers, writings, documents, minutes and
       registers maintained on paper or in electronic form.

3. Further as per section 2(40) of this Act, the "financial statement" in relation
       to a company, includes-

        A balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;

        A profit and loss account, or in the case of a company carrying on any
               activity not for profit, an income and expenditure account for the
               financial year;

        Cash flow statement for the financial year with exception in case of one
               person company, small company, dormant company and private
               company (if such private company is a start-up and has not committed
               a default in filing its financial statements under section 137 of the said
               Act or annual return under section 92 of the said Act with the
               Registrar1);

1 Vide exemption notification GSR 583(E) dated 13th June, 2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.5

        A statement of changes in equity, if applicable; and

        Any explanatory note annexed to, or forming part of, any document
               referred above.

       It is worth noting here that for the purposes of this Act, the term `start-up'
       or "start-up company" means a private company incorporated under the
       Companies Act, 2013 or the Companies Act, 1956 and recognised as start-
       up in accordance with the notification issued by the Department of Industrial
       Policy and Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

4. As per section 2(41) of this Act, the Financial Year, in relation to any
       company or body corporate, means the period ending on the 31st day of
       March every year, and where it has been incorporated on or after the 1st day
       of January of a year, the period ending on the 31st day of March of the
       following year, in respect whereof financial statement of the company or body
       corporate is made up.

Example 1 - Mahindra Limited was incorporated as a company on 22nd February
2023. Its first financial year shall comprise of the period ending on the 31st day of
the March of the following year i.e. 31st March 2024.

Two-year time from the date commencement of this Act was given to corporates
to align their financial year to the provisions contained in 2(41). [Transition period]

Provided that on an application made by a company or body corporate, which is a
holding company or a subsidiary or associate company of a company incorporated
outside India and which is required to follow a different financial year for
consolidation of its accounts outside India, the Central Government may, on the
basis of such application made in such form and manner as may be prescribed,
allow any period as its financial year, whether or not that period is a year.

It is worth noting that in case of a specified IFSC public company and specified IFSC
private company that is a subsidiary of a foreign company, the financial year of the
subsidiary may be same as the financial year of its holding company and approval
of the Tribunal shall not be required.

Earlier the power to hear and decide upon the application regarding different
financial year for consolidation of its accounts outside India was vested with
tribunal, which was assumed by Central Government through the Companies

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 dated 02.11.2018 (later repealed by the Companies
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2019 dated 12.01.2019). This is the reason behind "why
exemption notification specified above still carry the word tribunal" (which shall be
read as Central Government now). Ordinance also provided that pending before
the Tribunal shall be disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions
applicable to it before commencement of such ordinance.

BOOKS OF ACCOUNT SHOULD GIVE A TRUE AND FAIR VIEW AND
MUST BE KEPT ON ACCRUAL BASIS AND DOUBLE-ENTRY SYSTEM OF
ACCOUNTING

Section 128(1) requires these books of account should give a
true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the company,
including that of its branch office(s) and explain the
transactions effected both at the registered office and its
branches.

Section 128(1) also requires such books of account shall be kept on accrual basis
and according to the double entry system of accounting. Students are advised
to take note:

1. A True and fair view of the state of the affairs means that the financial
       statements are free from material misstatements and faithfully represents the
       financial performance and positioning of an entity.

2. Accrual basis of accounting is an accounting assumption, or an accounting
       concept followed in preparation of the financial statements, which warrants
       recording income and expenses as they accrue (earned or incurred); opposite
       to cash system when they are received or paid.

3. Double entry system of accounting is a method of recording any
       transaction of a business in a set of accounts, in which every transaction has
       a dual aspect of debit and credit and therefore, needs to be posted in at least
       two accounts. Double aspect enables an effective control of business because
       all the books of account must balance.

PLACE OF KEEPING BOOKS OF ACCOUNT

Section 128(1) further requires every company to prepare and keep the
books of account and other relevant books and papers and financial
statements at its registered office.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.7

But first proviso to sub-section 1 provides that all or any of the books of account
may be kept at such other place in India as the Board of directors may decide.
Where such a decision is taken by the Board, the company shall within seven days
thereof file with the registrar a notice in writing as per rule 2A of the Companies
(Accounts) Rules, 2014 in form AOC-5 giving full address of that other place.

MAINTENANCE OF BOOKS OF ACCOUNT IN ELECTRONIC FORM

Second proviso to section 128(1) allows company to keep books of
account or other relevant papers in electronic mode as per manner
specified in the Rule 3 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014.

For the purposes of rule 3, the expression "electronic mode" includes electronic
form and electronic record as defined in clause (r) and (t) respectively of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.

Remain accessible in India [Rule 3(1)]

The books of account and other relevant books and papers maintained in electronic
mode shall remain accessible in India, at all times, so as to be usable for
subsequent reference.

Audit trail and edit log [Proviso to Rule 3(1)]

In order to ensure audit trial, in case of company which uses accounting software
for maintaining its books of account, the proviso to rule 3(1) requires that:

a. For the financial year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2023,

b. Every such company (which uses accounting software) shall use only such
       accounting software,

c. Which has a feature of recording audit trail of each and every transaction,

d. Creating an edit log of each change made in books of account along with
       the date when such changes were made and

e. Ensuring that the audit trail cannot be disabled.

Retain in original or accurate form [Rule 3(2) and Rule 3(3)]

Sub-rule 2 requires the books of account and other relevant books and papers
referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be retained completely in the format in which
they were originally generated, sent or received, or in a format which shall

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

present accurately the information generated, sent or received and the information
contained in the electronic records shall remain complete and unaltered.

Further sub-rule 3 requires the information received from branch offices shall
not be altered and shall be kept in a manner where it shall depict what was
originally received from the branches.

Proper storage, retrieval and legible display [Rule 3(4) and Rule 3(5)]

Sub-rule 4 requires the information in the electronic record of the document shall
be capable of being displayed in a legible form.

Further sub-rule 5 requires there shall be a proper system for storage, retrieval,
display or printout of the electronic records as the Audit Committee, if any, or the
Board may deem appropriate and such records shall not be disposed of or
rendered unusable, unless permitted by law.

Proviso to sub-rule 5 requires the back-up of the books of account and other books
and papers of the company maintained in electronic mode, including at a place
outside India, if any, shall be kept in servers physically located in India on a daily
basis.

Intimation to Registrar ­ Information of Service Provider [Rule 3(6)]

The company shall intimate to the Registrar on an annual basis at the time of filing
of financial statement following relevant information related to service provider:

a. The name of the service provider;

b. The internet protocol (IP) address of service provider;

c. The location of the service provider (wherever applicable);

d. Where the books of account and other books and papers are maintained on
       cloud, such address as provided by the service provider.

e. Where the service provider is located outside India, the name and address of
       the person in control of the books of account and other books and papers in
       India.

BOOKS OF ACCOUNT - BRANCH OFFICE [SUB-SECTION 2]

Where a company has a branch office in or outside India, it shall be deemed to have
complied with the provisions of sub-section (1) if-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.9

 Proper books of account relating to the transactions effected at the branch
       office are kept at that office, and

 Proper summarised returns are sent on periodical basis by branch office to the
       company at its registered office or other place (referred to sub-section 1).

As per Rule 4(1) of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014, the summarised returns
of the books of account of the company kept and maintained outside India shall be
sent to the registered office at quarterly intervals, which shall be kept and maintained
at the registered office of the company and kept open to directors for inspection.

INSPECTION BY DIRECTORS [SUB-SECTION 3 & 4]

In case of books of account and other books and papers maintained by the
company within India.

Any director can inspect the books of account and other books and papers
maintained by the company within India during business hours. Hence same shall
be kept open for inspection at the registered office of the company or at such other
place in India.

In the case of financial information, if any, maintained outside the country

Where any other financial information maintained outside the country is required
by a director, the director shall furnish a request to the company setting out the
full details of the financial information sought, the period for which such
information is sought under Rule 4(2) of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014

Sub-rule 3 requires the company shall produce such financial information to the
director within fifteen days of the date of receipt of the written request.

Note:
1. The financial information (referred in sub-rule 2 and 3 above) shall be sought

       for by the director himself and not by or through his power of attorney holder
       or agent or representative.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

2. As per sub-section 4, where an inspection is made under sub-section 3, the
       officers and other employees of the company shall give to the person making
       such inspection all assistance in connection with the inspection which the
       company may reasonably be expected to give.

Inspection in respect of any subsidiary company

The proviso to sub-section 3 provides that a person can inspect the books of
account of the subsidiary, only on authorisation by way of the board resolution.

Period for preservation of books [Sub-section 5]

The books of account, together with vouchers relevant to any
entry in such books, are required to be preserved in good order by
the company for a period of not less than eight years immediately
preceding the relevant financial year.

Note:

1. In case of a company incorporated less than eight years before the financial
       year, the books of account for the entire period preceding the financial year
       together with the vouchers shall be so preserved.

2. As per proviso to sub-section 5, where an investigation has been ordered in
       respect of a company under Chapter XIV of the Act related to inspection,
       inquiry or investigation, the Central Government may direct that the books of
       account may be kept for such period longer than 8 years, as it may deem fit
       and give directions to that effect.

Persons responsible and Penalty [Sub-section 6]

Following shall be punishable with fine not less than fifty thousand rupees, which
may extend to five lakh rupees; if duty-bound to comply with provisions of this
section (Section 128 of this Act) but contravene such provisions:
 Managing Director defined under section 2(54),
 Whole-Time Director, in charge of finance defined under section 2(94),
 Chief Financial Officer defined under section 2(19), or
 Any other person of a company charged by the Board with duty of complying

       with provisions of section 128.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.11

Illustration 1- True false

Statement ­ Vouchers need not to be preserved as part of requirement of preserving
books for period of 8 years.

Answer
False

Reason ­ As per section 128(5) of the Companies Act, 2013, the books of
account, together with vouchers relevant to any entry in such books, are required
to be preserved in good order by the company for a period of not less than eight
years immediately preceding the relevant financial year.

Illustration 2

Can XYZ Limited maintain its books of account on cash basis?

Answer

The Companies Act, 2013 vide section 128(1) requires every company to prepare
books of account and other relevant books and papers and financial statement for
every financial year on accrual basis and according to double entry system of
accounting. No exception has been given by the Act to any class or classes of
companies from the above requirement. Hence XYZ Limited cannot maintain its
books of account on cash basis.

     3. FINANCIAL STATEMENT [SECTION 129]

As per sub-section 1, the financial statement shall:
 Give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company or companies,
 Comply with the accounting standards notified under section 133, further

       the items contained in such financial statements shall be in accordance with
       the accounting standards and
 Shall be in the form or forms as may be provided for different class or classes
       of companies in Schedule III.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Note

1. Schedule III has been divided into two divisions:

       Division I deal with financial statement for a company whose financial
       statement are required to comply with the Companies (Accounting
       Standards) Rules, 20212.

       Division II deals with financial statement for a company whose financial
       statement is required to comply with the Companies (Indian Accounting
       Standards) Rules, 20153.

2. Nothing contained in sub-section 1 to section 128 shall apply to any:

       - Insurance company or

       - Banking company or

       - Company engaged in the generation or supply of electricity, or

       - Other class of company for which a form of financial statement has been
               specified in or under the Act governing such class of company.

3. Further, if matters which are not required to be disclosed by Act governing
       the companies specified at point 2 above (such as Insurance Act, 1938;
       Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999; Banking
       Regulation Act, 1949; or Electricity Act, 2003), then non-disclosure of such
       matters shall not be considered as not presenting a true and fair view of
       the state of affairs of such company.

       Note ­ Point 3 stated above can be further simplified in the sense that `Despite
       non-disclosure of matters which are not required to be disclosed by
       applicable governing Act, the financial statement of companies specified at
       point 2 above are said to present a true and fair view of the state of affairs.'

4. For the purposes of section 129, any reference to the financial statement
       shall include any notes annexed to or forming part of such financial
       statement, giving information required to be given and allowed to be given
       in the form of such notes under this Act.

2 Vide notification GSR 432(E) dated 23rd June, 2021 as amended from time to time
3 Vide notification GSR 111(E) dated 16th February, 2015 as amended from time to time

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES  9.13

LAYING OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AT AGM [SUB-SECTION 2]

At every annual general meeting of a company, the Board of Directors of the
company shall lay before such meeting financial statements for the financial year.

CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS [SUB-SECTION 3]

Consolidation of financial Statement

Where a company has one or more subsidiaries or associate companies, it shall (in
addition to financial statements provided under sub-section 2);
 Prepare a consolidated financial statement (CFS) of the company and of all

       the subsidiaries, associate companies and joint ventures in the same form and
       manner as that of its own and in accordance with applicable accounting
       standards,
 Which shall also be laid before the annual general meeting of the company
       along with the laying of its financial statement under sub-section (2).

Salient features of financial statement of Subsidiaries, Associates and JVs ­
Form [First proviso to Sub-section 3 read with rule 5]

The statement containing the salient feature of the financial statement of a
company's subsidiary or subsidiaries, associate company or companies and joint
venture or ventures under the first proviso to sub-section (3) of section 129 shall
be in e-Form AOC-1 as per Rule 5 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014.

Manner of consolidation of Accounts [Second proviso to Sub-section 3 read
with rule 6]

Central Government may provide for the consolidation of accounts of companies
in such manner as may be prescribed under Rule 6 of the Companies (Accounts)
Rules, 2014, as explained below:

Manner of consolidation of Accounts - The consolidation of financial statements
of the company shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Schedule III of
the Act and the applicable accounting standards.

Exception to manner stated above

1. A company covered under sub-section (3) of section 129 which is not
       required to prepare consolidated financial statements under the Accounting
       Standards, it shall be sufficient if the company complies with provisions of
       consolidated financial statements provided in Schedule III of the Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

2. For a company which does not have a subsidiary or subsidiaries but has one
       or more associate companies or Joint Ventures or both will not be required
       to comply with this rule of consolidation of financial statements in respect of
       associate companies or joint ventures or both, as the case may be, only for
       the financial year commencing from the 1st day of April, 2014 and ending on
       the 31st day of March, 2015.

3. Nothing in this rule shall apply in respect of consolidation of financial
       statement by a company having subsidiary or subsidiaries incorporated
       outside India commencing on or after 1st April 2014.

Exemptions from preparation of CFS

The preparation of consolidated financial statements by a company is not required
if it meets the following conditions:

a. It is a wholly owned subsidiary, or is a partially owned subsidiary of another
       company and all its other members, including those not otherwise entitled to
       vote, having been intimated in writing and for which the proof of delivery of
       such intimation is available with the company, do not object to the company
       not presenting consolidated financial statements;

b. It is a company whose securities are not listed or are not in the process of
       listing on any stock exchange, whether in or outside India; and

c. Its ultimate or any intermediate holding company files consolidated financial
       statements with the Registrar which are in compliance with the applicable
       Accounting Standards.

Preparation, adoption and audit of consolidated financial statements [Sub-
section 4]
The provisions applicable to the preparation, adoption and audit of the financial
statements of a holding company shall, mutatis mutandis, also apply to the
consolidated financial statements.
DISCLOSURE OF DEVIATION FROM ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
ALONG WITH REASON AND EFFECT THEREOF [SUB-SECTION 5]

Without prejudice to sub-section (1), where the financial statements of a company
do not comply with the accounting standards referred to in sub-section (1), the
company shall disclose in its financial statements, the deviation from the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES  9.15

accounting standards, the reasons for such deviation and the financial effects, if
any, arising out of such deviation.

EXEMPTION BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT IN PUBLIC INTEREST [SUB-
SECTION 6]

The Central Government may, on its own or on an application by a class or classes
of companies, by notification, exempt any class or classes of companies from
complying with any of the requirements of this section or the rules made
thereunder, if it is considered necessary to grant such exemption in the public
interest and any such exemption may be granted either unconditionally or subject
to such conditions as may be specified in the notification.

Section 129 shall not apply to the Government Companies engaged in defence
production to the extent of application of relevant Accounting Standard on
segment reporting4

The exceptions, modifications and adaptations provided above shall be applicable
only to those Government Companies which has not committed a default in filing
its financial statements under section 137 of the said act or annual return under
section 92 of the said act with the registrar5

PENALTY [SUB-SECTION 7]

If a company contravenes the provisions of this section, the managing director, the
whole-time director in charge of finance, the Chief Financial Officer or any other
person charged by the Board with the duty of complying with the requirements of
this section and in the absence of any of the officers mentioned above, all the
directors shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year or with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both. Penal provision can be summarised as:

4 Exemption originally granted vide notification number G.S.R. 463(E) dated the 5th June, 2015,
later substituted vide notification number G.S.R. 802(E) dated 23.02.2018 to replace "AS-17"
with relevant Accounting Standard
5 Vide notification number G.S.R. 582(E) dated 13th June, 2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    9.16            CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

    Company contravenes the provisions of Section 129

    Whether any of below-mentioned officers are present?

MD  WTD in charge of Finance                       CFO  Any other person

          Yes                                           No (Absence)
Mentioned Officers                                       All directors

                                        Imprisonment upto 1yr
                           Fine from Rupees 50,000 to Rupees 5 lakh,

                                                  Or Both

Note: For listed companies, provisions contained in Regulation 33 and 52 of
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and Disclosure
Requirements) Regulations, 2015 are to be applied in addition to provisions of
section 129 of this Act.

Illustration 3
Modern Furniture Limited (MFL) is required to prepare the financial statement that
comply with accounting standards and shall be in form specified in Schedule III. But
the financial statement prepared and presented are not in compliance with applicable
accounting standards, therefore MFL is required to disclose which of following:

i. Deviation

ii. Reason of deviation

iii. Financial effects arise out of such deviation.

Options
a. Only i
b. Only i and ii
c. Only i and iii
d. All of i, ii, and iii

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.17

Answer ­ d

Reason ­ Where the financial statements of a company, which required to but do
not comply with the accounting standards, the company shall disclose in its
financial statements, the deviation from the accounting standards, the reasons for
such deviation and the financial effects, if any, arising out of such deviation.

     4. PERIODICAL FINANCIAL RESULTS [SECTION

          129A]

The Central Government may, require such class or classes of unlisted companies,
as may be prescribed:

a. To prepare the financial results of the company on such periodical basis and in
       such form as may be prescribed;

b. To obtain approval of the Board of Directors and complete audit or limited
       review of such periodical financial results in such manner as may be prescribed;

c. File a copy with the Registrar within a period of thirty days of completion of the
       relevant period with such fees as may be prescribed.

Students are advised to take note:

At present there are approximately over 11 lakh unlisted companies actively
operating in India. Some of these are really large enough with widely-spread
interests, that make corporate governance critical issue in case of such unlisted
companies as well. Hence this new section inserted vide Amendment Act of 2020
aims to improve corporate governance of certain class or classes of unlisted
companies by requiring them to prepare financial results on 'periodic' basis in
addition to annual submission of financial reports.

Mind it, no rule has been prescribed or notification has been made as on date
(30.04.2024) under the said section.

     5. RE-OPENING OF ACCOUNTS ON COURT'S OR
          TRIBUNAL'S ORDERS [SECTION 130]

This section seeks to provide for the re-opening of books of account and recasting
of financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.18                 CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS
               Application to be made by:

Central Govt.                                      SEBI  Any other concerned person

Income Tax authorities                                   Statutory regulatory body

               Application made to Court/
                           Tribunal

               Court/Tribunal passes an order to the effect that

Earlier accounts prepared in                             Affairs of company were mis-
      fraudulent manner                                  managed related to accounts

               Notice to be served to applicants         Time Limit for reopening:
                                                         Maximum period of 8 FY
                     Take Representation into            immediately preceding
                        consideration, if any            the current FY except
                                                         where direction by
                 Pass order to revise/ recast the        Central Government to
                               accounts                  maintain books of
                                                         account is beyond 8
               The revised accounts shall be final       years.

COURT/TRIBUNAL ORDER FOR RE-OPENING OF ACCOUNTS [SUB-
SECTION 1]

A company shall not:
a. re-open its books of account and
b. recast its financial statements,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.19

Unless an application in this regard is made by
a. the Central Government,
b. the Income-tax authorities,
c. the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI),
d. any other statutory regulatory body or authority or
e. any person concerned.
& an order is made by a court of competent jurisdiction or tribunal to the effect
a. That the relevant earlier accounts were prepared in a fraudulent manner; or
b. The affairs of the company were mismanaged during the relevant period,

       casting a doubt on the reliability of financial statements.

Proviso to section 130(1) requires the Court or Tribunal, as the case may be, shall:
 Give notice to the Central Government, Income-tax authorities, SEBI, or any

       other statutory regulatory body or authority concerned, or any other person
       concerned and
 Take into consideration the representations, if any, made by them before
       passing any order under this section.

Sub-section 2 is sort of saving clause that provides, without prejudice to the
provisions of this Act, the accounts so revised or re-casted; shall be final.

TIME LIMIT [SUB-SECTION 3]

Order of re-opening of books of account shall only relate to eight financial years
immediately preceding the current financial year.

But where a direction has been issued by the Central Government (under the
proviso to section 128(5) for keeping of books of account for a period longer than
eight years, the books of account may be ordered to be re-opened within such
longer period.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.20                    CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

6. VOLUNTARY REVISION OF FINANCIAL
     STATEMENTS OR BOARD'S REPORT
     [SECTION 131]

If it appears to the Directors of the Co.

 FS and Board report     Prepare Revised FS        Copy of order
not in compliance with        (Any 3 P.F.Y)        of tribunal to
                                                    be filed with
   section 129 &134     Revise Board's Report
                              (Any 3 P.F.Y)           Regsitrar
On approval and order
        of tribunal

VOLUNTARY REVISION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT OR BOARD'S
REPORT ON THE APPROVAL OF TRIBUNAL [SUB-SECTION 1]

If it appears to the directors of a company that:

a. the financial statement of the company does not comply
       with the provisions of section 129; or

b. the report of the Board does not comply with the provisions
       of section 134

They may prepare revised financial statement or board's report in respect of any
of the three preceding financial years.

After obtaining approval of the Tribunal on an application made by the company
in Form No. NCLT 1 within fourteen days of the decision taken by the Board.

A certified copy of the order of the Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar of
Companies within thirty days of the date of receipt of the certified copy.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES  9.21

Note:

1. Section 131 deals with the revision of financial statement or boards report, as
       the case may be, on a voluntary basis, if the board of directors so opines,
       unlike section 130.

2. Such revised financial statement or report shall not be prepared or filed more
       than once in a financial year.

3. Rule 77 of the National Company Law Tribunal Rules, 2016 requires:

a. The application shall contain the following particulars/details, namely:

       - Financial year or period to which such accounts relates;

       - The name and contact details of the Managing Director, Chief Financial
               Officer, directors, Company Secretary and officer of the company
               responsible for making and maintaining such books of account and
               financial statement;

       - Where such accounts are audited, the name and contact details of the
               auditor or any former auditor who audited such accounts;

       - Copy of the Board resolution passed by the Board of Directors;

       - Grounds for seeking revision of financial statement or Board's Report;

       - In case the majority of the directors of company or the auditor of the
               company has been changed immediately before the decision is taken
               to apply under section 131, the company shall disclose such facts in the
               application.

b. The company shall advertise the application at least fourteen days before
       the date of hearing;

c. The Tribunal shall issue notice to the auditor of the original financial
       statement and heard him.

d. The Tribunal may pass appropriate order in the matter as may deem fit, after
       considering the application, hearing the auditor and/or any other person.

       Note ­ As per first proviso to section 131(1), the tribunal shall also give notice
       to the Central Government and the Income tax authorities and shall take
       into consideration the representations, if any, made by that Government or
       the authorities before passing any order under this section.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

e. On receipt of approval from Tribunal a general meeting may be called and
       notice of such general meeting along with reasons for change in financial
       statements may be published in newspaper in English and in vernacular
       language.

       Note ­ As per third proviso to section 131(1), the detailed reasons for revision
       of such financial statement or report shall also be disclosed in the Board's
       report in the relevant financial year in which such revision is being made.

f. In the general meeting, the revised financial statements, statement of
       directors and the statement of auditors may be put up for consideration
       before a decision is taken on adoption of the revised financial statements.

g. On approval in the general meeting, the revised financial statements along
       with the statement of auditors or revised report of the Board, as the case may
       be, shall be filed with the Registrar of Companies within thirty days of the
       date of approval by the general meeting.

SCOPE OF REVISIONS [SUB-SECTION 2]

Where copies of the previous financial statement or report have been sent out to
members or delivered to the Registrar or laid before the company in general
meeting, the revisions must be confined to:

a. Correction in respect of which the previous financial statement does not
       comply with the provisions of section 129; and

b. Correction in respect of which the previous board report does not comply
       with the provisions of section 134; and

c. Making of any necessary consequential alternation.

FRAMING OF RULES BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT IN RELATION TO
REVISED FINANCIAL STATEMENT/DIRECTOR'S REPORT [SUB-SECTION 3]

The Central Government may make rules as to the application of the provisions
of this Act in relation to revised financial statement or a revised director's report
and such rules may, in particular:

a. Make different provisions according to which the previous financial statement
       or director's report are replaced or are supplemented by a document
       indicating the corrections to be made;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.23

b. Make provisions with respect to the functions of the company's auditor in
       relation to the revised financial statement or report;

c. Steps required to be taken by the directors.

Note:
Rule 77 of the National Company Law Tribunal Rules, 2016, notified in this regard
by the Central Government.

     7. CONSTITUTION OF NATIONAL FINANCIAL
          REPORTING AUTHORITY [SECTION 132]

CONSTITUTION OF NATIONAL FINANCIAL REPORTING AUTHORITY
(REFEREED AS TO NFRA OR THE AUTHORITY) [SUB-SECTION 1]

The Central Government may, by notification, constitute the National Financial
Reporting Authority (NFRA) to provide for matters relating to accounting and
auditing standards under this Act.

Note:
The Central Government hereby appoints the 1st October 2018 as the date of
constitution of National Financial Reporting Authority, with head office at New
Delhi (as require by sub-section 12).

Extra Reading (only to lay the foundation)

Provisions pertaining to NFRA and Power vested with NFRA are applicable
only in context of those companies and bodies corporate that are governed
by the NFRA, hence at outset, it is essential to list-out them.

As per rule 3 of the National Financial Reporting Authority Rules 2018, the Authority
shall have power to monitor and enforce compliance with accounting standards
and auditing standards, oversee the quality of service under sub-section (2) of
section 132 or undertake investigation under sub-section (4) of such section of the
auditors of the following class of companies and bodies corporate, namely:

a. Companies whose securities are listed on any stock exchange in India or
       outside India;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

b. Unlisted public companies having paid-up capital of not less than rupees five
       hundred crore or having annual turnover of not less than rupees one
       thousand crore or having, in aggregate, outstanding loans, debentures and
       deposits of not less than rupees five hundred crore as on the 31st March of
       immediately preceding financial year;

c. Insurance companies, banking companies, companies engaged in the
       generation or supply of electricity, companies governed by any special Act
       for the time being in force or bodies corporate incorporated by an Act in
       accordance with clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (4) of section 1
       of the Act;

d. Body corporate or company or person, or any class of bodies corporate or
       companies or persons, on a reference made to the Authority by the Central
       Government in public interest; and

e. A body corporate incorporated or registered outside India, which is a
       subsidiary or associate company of any company or body corporate
       incorporated or registered in India as referred to in clauses (a) to (d), if the
       income or net worth of such subsidiary or associate company exceeds twenty
       percent of the consolidated income or consolidated net worth of such
       company or the body corporate, as the case may be, referred to in clauses (a)
       to (d).

FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE NFRA [SUB-SECTION 1A AND 2]

Sub-section 1A to section 132 provides that, National Financial Reporting Authority
shall perform its functions through such divisions as may be prescribed.

Further sub-section 2 to section 132 read with rule 4, 6 to 9 of the National
Financial Reporting Authority Rules 2018 lays down the functions and duties that
NFRA shall perform, namely:

The Authority shall protect the public interest and the interests of investors,
creditors and others associated with the companies or bodies corporate by
establishing high quality standards of accounting and auditing and exercising
effective oversight of accounting functions performed by the companies and
bodies corporate and auditing functions performed by auditors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.25

Without prejudice to the generality, the Authority in particular shall: -

a. Maintain details of particulars of auditors appointed in the companies and
       bodies corporate governed by NFRA;

b. Recommend accounting standards and auditing standards for approval
       by the Central Government;

       Note:

       For the purpose of recommending accounting standards or auditing
       standards for approval by the Central Government, Rule 6 requires, the NFRA:

        Shall receive recommendations from the Institute of Chartered
               Accountants of India (ICAI) on proposals for new accounting standards
               or auditing standards or for Amendment to existing accounting
               standards or auditing standards;

        May seek additional information from the ICAI on the recommendations
               received under clause (a), if required.

       The Authority shall consider the recommendations and additional
       information in such manner as it deems fit before making recommendations
       to the Central Government.

c. Monitor and enforce compliance with accounting standards and auditing
       standards;

       Note:

       For the purpose of monitoring and enforcing compliance with accounting
       standards under the Act by a company or a body corporate, Rule 7 requires
       NFRA:

       1. May review the financial statements of such company or body
               corporate, as the case may be, and if so required, direct such company
               or body corporate or its auditor by a written notice, to provide further
               information or explanation or any relevant documents relating to such
               company or body corporate, within such reasonable time as may be
               specified in the notice.

       2. May require the personal presence of the officers of the company or
               body corporate and its auditor for seeking additional information or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.26  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       explanation in connection with the review of the financial statements of
       such company or body corporate.

3. Shall publish its findings relating to non-compliances on its website and
       in such other manner as it considers fit, unless it has reasons not to do
       so in the public interest and it records the reasons in writing.

4. Where the Authority finds or has reason to believe that any accounting
       standard has or may have been violated, it may decide on the further
       course of investigation or enforcement action through its concerned
       Division.

For the purpose of monitoring and enforcing compliance with auditing
standards under the Act by a company or a body corporate, Rule 8 requires
NFRA:

1. May review working papers (including audit plan and other audit
       documents) and communications related to the audit;

2. May evaluate the sufficiency of the quality control system of the auditor
       and the manner of documentation of the system by the auditor; and

3. May perform such other testing of the audit, supervisory, and quality
       control procedures of the auditor as may be considered necessary or
       appropriate.

4. May require an auditor to report on its governance practices and
       internal processes designed to promote audit quality, protect its
       reputation and reduce risks including risk of failure of the auditor and
       may take such action on the report as may be necessary.

5. May seek additional information or may require the personal presence
       of the auditor for seeking additional information or explanation in
       connection with the conduct of an audit.

6. Shall perform its monitoring and enforcement activities through its
       officers or experts with sufficient experience in audit of the relevant
       industry.

7. Shall publish its findings relating to non-compliances on its website and
       in such other manner as it considers fit, unless it has reasons not to do
       so in the public interest and it records the reasons in writing.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.27

       8. Shall not publish proprietary or confidential information, unless it has
               reasons to do so in the public interest and it records the reasons in
               writing.

       9. May send a separate report containing proprietary or confidential
               information to the Central Government for its information.

       10. Where the Authority finds or has reason to believe that any law or
               professional or other standard has or may have been violated by an
               auditor, it may decide on the further course of investigation or
               enforcement action through its concerned Division.

d. Oversee the quality of service of the professions associated with ensuring
       compliance with such standards and suggest measures for improvement in
       the quality of service;

       Notes

       1. Rule 9 provides, on the basis of its review, the NFRA may direct an
               auditor to take measures for improvement of audit quality including
               changes in their audit processes, quality control, and audit reports and
               specify a detailed plan with time-limits.

       2. It shall be the duty of the auditor to make the required improvements
               and send a report to the NFRA explaining how it has complied with the
               directions made by the NFRA.

       3. The NFRA shall monitor the improvements made by the auditor and
               take such action as it deems fit depending on the progress made by the
               auditor.

       4. The NFRA may refer cases with regard to overseeing the quality of
               service of auditors of companies or bodies corporate referred to in rule
               3 to the Quality Review Board constituted under the Chartered
               Accountants Act, 1949 or call for any report or information in respect of
               such auditors or companies or bodies corporate from such Board as it
               may deem appropriate.

       5. The NFRA may take the assistance of experts for its oversight and
               monitoring activities.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

e. Promote awareness in relation to the compliance of accounting standards
       and auditing standards;

f. Co-operate with national and international organisations of independent
       audit regulators in establishing and overseeing adherence to accounting
       standards and auditing standards; and

g. Perform such other functions and duties as may be necessary or incidental
       to the aforesaid functions and duties.

       Note:

       The Central Government may,
        By notification,
        Delegate any of its powers or functions under the Act to NFRA, other

               than the power to make rules;
        Subject to such conditions, limitations and restrictions as may be

               specified in such notification.

       Sub-section 2 has overriding effects anything contained in any other law for
       the time being in force.

COMPOSITION OF NFRA [SUB-SECTION 3, 3A, 3B]

The NFRA shall consist of

a. Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence and having expertise in
       accountancy, auditing, finance or law and

b. Such other members not exceeding fifteen consisting of part-time and full-
       time members.

Each division of the NFRA shall be presided over by the Chairperson or a full-time
member authorised by the Chairperson.

There shall be an executive body of the NFRA consisting of the Chairperson and
full-time members of such Authority for efficient discharge of its functions.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.29

Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by the Central Government in the
manner and on the terms as prescribed under the National Financial Reporting
Authority (Manner of Appointment and other Terms and Conditions of Service of
Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2018.

The chairperson and members shall make a declaration to the Central Government in
the prescribed form regarding no conflict of interest or lack of independence in
respect of his or their appointment.

The chairperson and members, who are in full-time employment with National
Financial Reporting Authority shall not be associated with any audit firm (including
related consultancy firms) during the course of their appointment and two years after
ceasing to hold such appointment.

The following persons shall be appointed as part time members of NFRA, namely:

a. One member to represent the MCA, who shall be an officer not below the rank
       of Joint Secretary, ex-officio;

b. One member to represent the CAG of India, who shall be an officer not below
       the rank of Accountant General or Principal Director, ex-officio;

c. One member to represent the RBI, who shall be an officer not below the rank of
       Executive Director, ex-officio;

d. One member to represent the SEBI, who shall be an officer not below the rank
       of Executive Director, ex-officio;

e. President, ICAI, ex-officio;

f. Chairperson, Accounting Standards Board, ICAI, ex-officio;

g. Chairperson, Auditing and Assurance Standards Board, ICAI, ex-officio; and

h. Two experts from the field of accountancy, auditing, finance or law.

Sub-section 11 empowers the Central Government to appoint a secretary and such
other employees as it may consider necessary for the efficient performance of
functions by the National Financial Reporting Authority under this Act and the terms
and conditions of service of the secretary and employees shall be such as may be
prescribed.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

POWER TO INVESTIGATE [SUB-SECTION 4]

NFRA shall have the power to investigate,

a. Into the matters of professional or other misconduct committed by any
       member or firm of chartered accountants, registered under the Chartered
       Accountants Act, 1949.

b. Either suo moto or on a reference made to it by the Central Government in
       such manner as prescribed by rule 10 of the National Financial Reporting
       Authority Rules, 2018.

Students are advised to take note:

No other institute or body shall initiate or continue any proceedings in such matters
of misconduct where the NFRA has initiated an investigation under this section.

For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "professional or other
misconduct" shall have the same meaning assigned to it as given under section 22
of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.

Sub-section 4 has overriding effects anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force.

Quasi-judicial powers [Section 132(4)(b)]

NFRA have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:

a. Discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such
       place and at such time as may be specified by the NFRA;

b. Summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them
       on oath;

c. Inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any person
       referred to in clause (b) at any place;

d. Issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or documents.

Power to make order [Section 132(4)(c)]

Where professional or other misconduct is proved, the NFRA shall have the power
to make order for:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                     ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                   9.31

Imposing penalty as stated below:

Liable (in case of)     Minimum                                 Maximum
      Individual     one lakh rupee                five times of the fees received
         Firms       five lakh rupees              ten times of the fees received

Debarring the member or the firm

                     From                            Minimum          Maximum
                                                                        period
                                                     period
                                                                      Ten years
Appointed as an auditor or internal auditor or Six months
undertaking any audit in respect of financial
statements or internal audit of the functions and

activities of any company or body corporate; or

Performing any valuation as provided under Sec 247,

APPEAL AGAINST ORDERS OF NFRA [SUB-SECTION 5]

Any person aggrieved by any order of the NFRA issued under clause (c) of sub-
section (4), may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal in such manner
and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.

MEETINGS OF NFRA [SUB-SECTION 10]

The National Financial Reporting Authority shall meet at such times and places and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings in such manner as prescribed under Rule 3 of the National Financial
Reporting Authority (Meeting for Transaction of Business) Rules, 2019.

Note ­ NFRA may, meet at such other places in India as it deems fit.

MAINTENANCE OF BOOKS OF ACCOUNT BY NFRA & AUDIT THEREOF BY
CAG [SUB-SECTION 13 & 14]

The National Financial Reporting Authority shall maintain such books of account
and other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as the
Central Government may, in consultation with the CAG of India prescribe.

The accounts of the NFRA shall be audited by the CAG of India at such intervals as
may be specified by him.

Such accounts as certified by the CAG of India together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the NFRA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

ANNUAL REPORT ON WORKING OF NFRA [SUB-SECTION 15]

The National Financial Reporting Authority shall prepare in such form and at such
time for each financial year as may be prescribed its annual report giving a full
account of its activities during the financial year and forward a copy thereof to the
Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the annual report and
the audit report given by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to be laid
before each House of Parliament.

Note:

Every existing body corporate other than a company governed by these rules, shall
inform the NFRA within 30 days of the commencement of NFRA rules, in Form
NFRA-1, the particulars of the auditor as on the date of commencement of these
rules.

A company or a body corporate other than a company governed under NFRA Rules
shall continue to be governed by the NFRA for a period of 3 years after it ceases to
be listed or its paid-up capital or turnover or aggregate of loans, debentures and
deposits falls below the limit stated therein [i.e. mentioned in points (a) to (e)
above].

Punishment in case of non-compliance - If a company or any officer of a company
or an auditor or any other person contravenes any of the provisions of NFRA Rules,
the company and every officer of the company who is in default or the auditor or
such other person shall be punishable as per the provisions of section 450 of the
Act.

     8. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO PRESCRIBE
          ACCOUNTING STANDARDS [SECTION 133]

Section 133 of the Companies Act, 2013 empowers the Central Government to
prescribe the accounting standards or any addendum thereto, as recommended by
the ICAI in consultation with and after examination of the recommendations made
by the NFRA.
Proviso to section 133 suggests, until the NFRA is constituted under section 132 of
the Companies Act, 2013, the Central Government may prescribe the standards of
accounting or any addendum thereto, as recommended by the ICAI in consultation
with and after examination of the recommendations made by the National Advisory

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                           9.33

Committee on Accounting Standards (NACAS) constituted under the previous
company law. Since NFRA constituted in 2018, hence this proviso lost it operating
effects.

Note:

Exercising the powers conferred under section 133, the MCA on behalf of Central
Government so far has notified:
 Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 20216 and
 Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 20157.

Regulation 48 of Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 supplement the provisions to section
133 of this Act by providing that, the listed entity shall comply with all the
applicable and notified Accounting Standards from time to time.

    9. FINANCIAL STATEMENT, BOARD'S REPORT,
          ETC. [SECTION 134]

Section 134 deals with approval of financial statement by the Board of Directors in
addition to report by the Board of Directors including Director's responsibility
statement.
AUTHENTICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS [SUB-SECTION 1, 2,
AND 7]

                                               Financial Statements

 Signed on
behalf of the

    Board

Chairperson (authorised by    Chief Executive  Chief Financial  Company
the Board)/ two directors (1       Officer          Officer     secretary

      shall be MD,if any)

6 Vide notification GSR 432(E) dated 23rd June, 2021 as amended from time to time.
7 Vide notification GSR 111(E) dated 16th February, 2015 as amended from time to time.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

As per sub-section 1, the financial statement shall be approved by the Board
of Directors before they are signed on behalf of the Board for the
submission to the auditor for his report thereon; at least by:

a. The chairperson of the company where he is authorised by
       the Board OR the two directors out of which one shall be managing director,
       if any, and

b. The Chief Executive Officer, and

c. The Chief Financial Officer and

d. The company secretary of the company, wherever they are appointed.

Consolidated financial statement, if any also need to be approved in similar manner.

In the case of one person company financial statements shall be approved only by
one director.

Sub-section 2 requires the auditors' report shall be attached to every financial
statement.

Further sub-section 7 provides a signed copy of every financial statement, including
consolidated financial statement, if any, shall be issued, circulated or published
along with a copy of

a. Any notes annexed to or forming part of such financial statement:

b. The auditor's report; and

c. The Board's report referred to in sub section 3.

Illustration 4

The Board of Directors of ABC Ltd. wants to circulate unaudited accounts before the
Annual General Meeting of the shareholders of the Company. Whether such an act
of ABC Ltd. is tenable?

Answer

Section 129(2) of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that at every annual general
meeting of a company, the Board of Directors of the company shall lay before
such meeting financial statements for the financial year. Further section 134(7)
provides that signed copy of every financial statement, including consolidated

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.35

financial statement, if any, shall be issued, circulated or published along with a
copy each of:

a. Any notes annexed to or forming part of such financial statement;

b. The auditor's report; and

c. The Board's report.

It, therefore, follows that unaudited accounts cannot be sent to members or
unaudited accounts cannot be filed with the Registrar of Companies. So, such
an act of ABC Ltd., is not tenable.

BOARD'S REPORT [SUB-SECTION 3, 3A, AND 4 READ WITH RULE 8
OF THE COMPANIES (ACCOUNTS) RULES, 2014]

Board's report shall be attached to statements laid before a company in general
meeting.

Content of Board's Report

Section 134(3) read with rule 8 prescribes, the board report shall include:

a. The web address, if any, where annual return referred to in sub-section (3)
       of section 92 (i.e., Annual Return) has been placed;

b. Number of meetings of the Board;

c. Directors' responsibility statement;

ca. Details in respect of frauds reported by auditors under sub-section (12)
       of section 143 (i.e. Powers and duties of auditors....), other than those which
       are reportable to the Central Government;

d. A statement on declaration given by independent directors under sub-
       section (6) of section 149 (i.e., Company to have board of board of Directors in
       relation to independent director);

e. In case of a company covered under sub-section (1) of section 178 (i.e.,
       Nomination and Remuneration Committee and Stakeholders Relationship
       Committee), company's policy on directors' appointment and
       remuneration including criteria for determining qualifications, positive
       attributes, independence of a director and other matters provided under
       sub-section (3) of section 178;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Clause (e) shall not apply to the Government Companies8.

       The exceptions, modifications and adaptations provided above shall be
       applicable only to those Government Companies which has not committed
       a default in filing its financial statements under section 137 of the said Act
       or annual return under section 92 of the said Act with the registrar9.

f. Explanations or comments by the Board on every qualification,
       reservation or adverse remark or disclaimer made:

       i. By the auditor in his report; and

       ii. By the company secretary in practice in his secretarial audit report;

g. Particulars of loans, guarantees or investments under section 186;

h. Particulars of contracts or arrangements with related parties referred to in
       section 188 (1) (i.e., Related Party Transactions) in the e-Form AOC-2;

i. The state of the company's affairs;

j. The amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to any reserves;

k. The amount, if any, which it recommends should be paid by way of dividend;

l. Material changes and commitments, if any, affecting the financial position
       of the company which have occurred between the end of the financial year
       of the company to which the financial statements relate and the date of the
       report;

m. The conservation of energy, technology absorption, foreign exchange
       earnings and outgo, in such manner as may be prescribed;

       The Government companies engaged in producing defence equipment is
       exempted from disclosure under clause m.10

n. A statement indicating development and implementation of a risk
       management policy for the company including identification therein of

8 Exemption granted vide notification number G.S.R. 463(E) dated the 5th June, 2015.
9 Vide notification number G.S.R. 582(E) dated 13th June, 2017.
10 Exemption granted vide Companies (Accounts) Second Amendment Rules, 2015 dated 4th
September, 2015.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES  9.37

       elements of risk, if any, which in the opinion of the Board may threaten the
       existence of the company;

o. The details about the policy developed and implemented by the company on
       corporate social responsibility initiatives taken during the year;

p. In case of a listed company and every other public company having such
       paid-up share capital of twenty five crore rupees or more calculated at
       the end of the preceding financial year shall include, in the report by its Board
       of directors, a statement indicating the manner in which formal annual
       evaluation of the performance of the Board, its Committees and of
       individual directors has been made;

       Clause (p) shall not apply to the Government Companies11

       The exceptions, modifications and adaptations provided above shall be
       applicable only to those Government Companies which has not committed
       a default in filing its financial statements under section 137 of the said Act
       or annual return under section 92 of the said Act with the registrar12.

q. Such other matters as prescribed Rule 8 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules,
       2014, namely:

       i. The financial summary or highlights;

       ii. The change in the nature of business, if any;

       iii. The details of directors or key managerial personnel who were
               appointed or have resigned during the year;

       iiia. A statement regarding opinion of the Board with regard to integrity,
               expertise and experience (including the proficiency) of the
               independent directors appointed during the year.

               Explanation - For the purposes of this clause, the expression
               "proficiency" means the proficiency of the independent director as
               ascertained from the online proficiency self-assessment test conducted
               by the institute notified under sub-section (1) of section 150 (i.e.,

11 Exemption granted vide notification number G.S.R. 463(E) dated the 5th June, 2015.
12 Vide notification number G.S.R. 582(E) dated 13th June, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.38  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Manner of selection of Independent Directors and maintenance of
       databank of independent directors).

iv. The names of companies which have become or ceased to be its
       subsidiaries, joint ventures or associate companies during the year;

v. The details relating to deposits such as accepted during the year;
       remained unpaid or unclaimed as at the end of the year; whether there
       has been any default in repayment of deposits or payment of interest
       thereon during the year and if so, number of such cases and the total
       amount involved at the beginning of the year, maximum during the
       year, and at the end of the year;

vi. The details of deposits which are not in compliance with the
       requirements of Chapter V (i.e., Acceptance of Deposits by Companies)
       of the Act;

vii. The details of significant and material orders passed by the regulators
       or courts or tribunals impacting the going concern status and
       company's operations in future;

viii. The details in respect of adequacy of internal financial controls with
       reference to the Financial Statements.

ix. A disclosure, as to whether maintenance of cost records as specified
       by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 148 of this
       Act, is required by the Company and accordingly such accounts and
       records are made and maintained,

x. A statement that the company has complied with provisions relating to
       the constitution of Internal Complaints Committee under the Sexual
       Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and
       Redressal) Act, 2013 along with the following details: -

       (a) number of complaints of sexual harassment received in
               the year;

       (b) number of complaints disposed off during the year; and

        (c) number of cases pending for more than ninety days.

xi. The details of application made or any proceeding pending under the
       Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 during the year along-with
       their status as at the end of the financial year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                    9.39

xii. The details of difference between amount of the valuation done at the
       time of one-time settlement and the valuation done while taking loan
       from the Banks or Financial Institutions along with the reasons thereof.

xiii. a statement by the company with respect to the compliance of the
       provisions relating to the Maternity Benefit Act 1961.

Note - Rule 8 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 shall not apply to One
Person Company or Small Company. Instead rule 8A is applicable upon them
that is detailed on next page.

Students are advised to take note:

1. Where disclosures referred to in sub-section 3 to section 134 have
       been included in the financial statements, such disclosures shall be
       referred to instead of being repeated in the Board's report. (It is worth
       noting earlier this benefit rest with specified IFSC public company13
       and specified IFSC private company 14 only, but w.e.f. 31.7.2018
       extended to all)

2. Where the policy referred to in clause (e) or clause (o) of section 134(3)
       is made available on company's website, if any, it shall be sufficient
       compliance of the requirements under such clauses if the salient
       features of the policy and any change therein are specified in brief in
       the Board's report and the web-address is indicated therein at which
       the complete policy is available.

3. Board's Report shall be prepared based on the standalone financial
       statement of the company and shall report on the highlights of
       performance of subsidiaries, associates and joint venture companies
       and their contribution to the overall performance of the company
       during the period under report.

13 Vide notification GSR 08(E) dated 4th January, 2017.
14 Vide notification GSR 09(E) dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.40  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Abridged Board's report for One Person Company and Small Company [Sub-
section 3A read with rule 8A of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014]

The Board's Report of One Person Company and Small Company shall be prepared
based on the stand-alone financial statement of the company, which shall be in
abridged form and contain the following;

a. The web address, if any, where annual return referred to in sub-section (3) of
       section 92 has been placed;

b. Number of meetings of the Board;

c. Directors' Responsibility Statement as referred to in sub-section (5) of section
       134;

d. Details in respect of frauds reported by auditors under sub-section (12) of
       section 143 other than those which are reportable to the Central Government;

e. Explanations or comments by the Board on every qualification, reservation or
       adverse remark or disclaimer made by the auditor in his report;

f. The state of the company's affairs;

g. The financial summary or highlights;

h. Material changes from the date of closure of the financial year in the nature
       of business and their effect on the financial position of the company;

i. The details of directors who were appointed or have resigned during the year;

j. The details or significant and material orders passed by the regulators or
       courts or tribunals impacting the going concern status and company's
       operations in future.

k. The particulars of contracts or arrangements with related parties referred to
       in sub-section (1) of section 188 in the Form AOC-2.

Board's Report in case of OPC [Sub-section 4]

In case of a One Person Company, the report of the Board of Directors to be
attached to the financial statement under this section shall, mean a report
containing explanations or comments by the Board on every qualification,
reservation or adverse remark or disclaimer made by the auditor in his report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.41

Students may note, after insertion of sub-section 3A to section 134 and rule 8A to
the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 the importance of sub-section 4 reduced
substantially.

DIRECTORS' RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT [SUB-SECTION 5]

The Directors' Responsibility Statement referred to in 134(3)(c) shall state that:

a. In the preparation of the annual accounts, the applicable accounting
       standards had been followed along with proper explanation relating to
       material departures

b. The directors had selected such accounting policies and applied them
       consistently and made judgments and estimates that are reasonable and
       prudent so as to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the
       company at the end of the financial year and of the profit and loss of the
       company for that period;

c. The directors had taken proper and sufficient care for the maintenance of
       adequate accounting records in accordance with the provisions of this Act
       for safeguarding the assets of the company and for preventing and
       detecting fraud and other irregularities;

d. The directors had prepared the annual accounts on a going concern basis;

e. The directors, in the case of a listed company, had laid down internal
       financial controls to be followed by the company and that such internal
       financial controls are adequate, were operating effectively; and

         The term "internal financial controls" for clause e specified above means
         the policies and procedures adopted by the company for ensuring the
         orderly and efficient conduct of its business, including adherence to
         company's policies, the safeguarding of its assets, the prevention and
         detection of frauds and errors, the accuracy and completeness of the
         accounting records, and the timely preparation of reliable financial
         information.

f. The directors had devised proper systems to ensure compliance with the
       provisions of all applicable laws and that such systems were adequate and
       operating effectively.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                9.42  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Illustration 5

Modern Furniture Limited a listed entity has internal financial controls in place, during
the financial year a failure in control system has been reported; controls were reinstated
soon after such incident. Whether directors in Director's Responsibility Statement can
state that controls are adequate and operating efficiently?

Answer

Adequacy refers to the design of the control/system and signify whether the
control/system that is in place, is fit for purpose or not.

Operating effectively refers to whether the control/system in place has the
desired effect of mitigating the risk or not.

Here, adequacy and operating effectively together shall be read as adequate,
operating effectively and applicable throughout also.

Therefore, directors of Modern Furniture Limited in Director's Responsibility
Statement can't state that controls are adequate and operating efficiently.

SIGNING OF BOARD'S REPORT [SUB-SECTION 6]

The Board's report and any annexures thereto shall be signed by:

a. Chairperson of the company if he is authorised by the Board and

b. Where he is not so authorised, shall be signed by:

i. At least two directors, one of whom shall be a managing director, or

ii. The director where there is one director.

CONTRAVENTION [SUB-SECTION 8]

If a company is in default in complying with the provisions of this section, the
company shall be liable to a penalty of three lakh rupees and every officer of the
company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees.
Penalty provisions are tabled below:

                    Persons liable                     Punishment
                       Company                          ` 3,00,000
                                                         ` 50,000
Every officer of the company who is in default

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.43

Illustration 6

ABC Company is a one-person company and has only one director. Who shall
authenticate the balance sheet and statement of profit & loss and the Board`s report?

Answer

In case of a One Person Company, the financial statements shall be signed by only
one director, for submission to the auditor for his report thereon. So, the financial
statements signed by one director shall be considered in order.

10. CORPORATE SOCIAL                               RESPONSIBILITY
     [SECTION 135]

The corporate (as legal person) use variety of other capitals in blend with economic
capital provided by shareholders to make revenue, earn profit, ensure survival and
register growth. Hence instead of being responsible only towards fund providers,
the corporate is responsible for wide range of stakeholders including the society
within which it exists and operate (even to the environment as well, under the
concept of triple bottom line). India become torch bearer for rest of world by giving
legal mandate to corporate social responsibility by incorporating legal provisions
regarding same as section 135 in the Companies Act, 2013 that requires corporates
to mandatorily spend a prescribed percentage of their profits on certain specified
areas of social upliftment in discharge of their social responsibilities.

Broadly, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) implies a concept, whereby
companies decide to contribute to a better society and a cleaner environment­ a
concept, whereby the companies integrate social and other useful concerns in their
business operations for the betterment of its stakeholders and society in general.

The provisions that are enshrined under section 135 of the Act pertaining to
Corporate Social Responsibility shall be referred in light of the Companies (Social
Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014 (herein after referred as to `the CSR Rules').

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.44  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

DEFINITIONS

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) (Rule 2(d) of the CSR Rules)

CSR means the activities undertaken by a Company in pursuance of its statutory
obligation laid down in section 135 of the Act in accordance with the provisions
contained in these rules, but shall not include the following, namely:-

i. Activities undertaken in pursuance of normal course of business of the
       company

       Note:

       Any company engaged in research and development activity of new vaccine,
       drugs and medical devices in their normal course of business may undertake
       research and development activity of new vaccine, drugs and medical devices
       related to COVID-19 for financial years 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 subject to
       the conditions that;

       a. Such research and development activities shall be carried out in
               collaboration with any of the institutes or organisations mentioned in
               item (ix) of Schedule VII to the Act;

       b. Details of such activity shall be disclosed separately in the Annual report
               on CSR included in the Board's Report.

ii. Any activity undertaken by the company outside India except for training of
       Indian sports personnel representing any State or Union territory at national
       level or India at international level

iii. Contribution of any amount directly or indirectly to any political party under
       section 182 of the Act

iv. Activities benefitting employees of the company as defined in clause (k) of
       section 2 of the Code on Wages, 2019

v. Activities supported by the companies on sponsorship basis for deriving
       marketing benefits for its products or services

vi. Activities carried out for fulfilment of any other statutory obligations under
       any law in force in India.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.45

CSR Committee (Rule 2(e) of the CSR Rules)

CSR Committee means the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the
Board referred to in section 135 of the Act (i.e., constituted under sub-section 1 of
section 135).

CSR Policy (Rule 2(f) of the CSR Rules)

CSR Policy means a statement containing;

a. The approach and direction given by the board of a company, taking into
       account the recommendations of CSR Committee, and

b. Includes guiding principles for selection, implementation and monitoring of
       activities as well as formulation of the annual action plan.

Administrative overheads (Rule 2(b) of the CSR Rules)

Administrative overheads means the expenses incurred by the company for
`general management and administration' of Corporate Social Responsibility
functions in the company but shall not include the expenses directly incurred for
the designing, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of a particular
Corporate Social Responsibility project or programme.

International Organisation (Rule 2(g) of the CSR Rules)

International Organisation means an organisation notified by the Central
Government as an international organisation under section 3 of the United Nations
(Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947, to which the provisions of the Schedule to
the said Act apply.

Net Profit (Rule 2(h) of the CSR Rules read with explanation to section 135 of
the Act)

Net profit means the net profit of a company as per its financial statement
prepared in accordance with the applicable provisions (net profit shall be calculated
in accordance with provisions of section 198) of the Act, and but shall not include
the following, namely: -

i. Any profit arising from any overseas branch or branches of the company,
       whether operated as a separate company or otherwise; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.46  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

ii. Any dividend received from other companies in India, which are covered
       under and complying with the provisions of section 135 of the Act.

In case of a foreign company covered under these rules, net profit means the net
profit of such company as per profit and loss account prepared in terms of clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of section 381, read with section 198 of the Act.

Ongoing Project (Rule 2(i) of the CSR Rules read with explanation to section
135 of the Act)

Ongoing Project means:

a. A multi-year project undertaken by a Company in fulfilment
       of its CSR obligation having timelines not exceeding three
       years excluding the financial year in which it was
       commenced, and

b. Such project that was initially not approved as a multi-year
       project but whose duration has been extended beyond
       one year by the board based on reasonable justification.

Example 2

Modern Furniture Limited (MFL) undertake a CSR project in light of its CSR policy;
of placing and installing benches as public parks and gardens in supervision of
district administration. Initially it was estimated that project will be completed in a
span of 8-10 months; but due to renovation of half a dozen of parks the task of
installing benches there postponed till the construction is completed (which was
expected to take further couple of quarters). Board of MFL considering the
circumstances declare the project an ongoing project, extend the duration beyond
one year; and also provided reasonable justification. Whether board of MFL
correctly re-categories the project as ongoing project or not?

Rule 2(i) of the CSR rules provides that projects which are initially of less than a
year's time (therefore not registered as multi-year project) but duration of which
extended beyond the one-year period, by board based on reasonable causes or
justification; shall be re-categories as ongoing project. Hence, decision of board of
MFL is legal and valid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.47

Public Authority (Rule 2(j) of the CSR Rules)

Public Authority means `Public Authority' as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of
the Right to Information Act, 2005.

COMPANIES THAT REQUIRED TO CONSTITUTE A CSR COMMITTEE
AND COMPOSITION THEREOF [SUB-SECTION 1 and 9]

Criteria that mandate constitution of CSR committee:

A company shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the
Board if during the immediately preceding financial year such company having;

a. Net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more or

b. Turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or

c. Net profit of rupees five crore or more.

As per Rule 3(1) of CSR Rules, every company including its holding or subsidiary, and
a foreign company defined under clause (42) of section 2 of the Act having its branch
office or project office in India, which fulfils the criteria specified in sub-section (1)
of section 135 of the Act shall comply with the provisions of section 135 of the Act and
CSR rules.

Further, proviso to rule 3(1) of CSR Rules states, a company having any
amount/balance in its Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account as per
section 135(6) shall constitute a CSR Committee and comply with the provisions
contained in sub-sections (2) to (6) of the said section.

1. Net-worth and Turnover is defined in clause (57) and (91) to section 2 of the Act,
       respectively; same are stated under chapter 1 of this module. Whereas Net Profit
       is defined under the Rule 2(h) of the CSR Rules read with explanation to section
       135 of the Act.

2. The net worth, turnover or net profit of a foreign company of the Act shall be
       computed in accordance with balance sheet and profit and loss account of such
       company prepared in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of sub-section
       (1) of section 381 and section 198 of the Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.48  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Illustration 7

ABC Ltd is a company with a turnover of more than ` 1000 crore in each of the
preceding three financial years and have incurred a loss in one of the preceding three
financial years. Will it be required to constitute CSR committee?

Answer

As per section 135(1) of the Act, if any one of the three criteria (whether net worth,
or turnover or net profit) gets satisfied then the company is mandatorily required
to constitute CSR committee and comply with other CSR provisions. Hence, ABC
Ltd. will be required to constitute CSR committee and comply with other CSR
provisions based on its turnover. The mere fact that company has incurred loss in
one of the preceding three financial years will not be considered for determining
the applicability of CSR to the companies.

Exception

According to sub-section 9, where the amount to be spent by a company under
sub-section 5 does not exceed fifty lakh rupees, the requirement for
constitution of the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall not be
applicable and the functions of such Committee provided under this section shall,
in such cases, be discharged by the Board of Directors of such company.

Composition of CSR committee

Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the Board consisting of three or
more directors, out of which at least one director shall be an independent
director.

Proviso to section 135(1) of the Act read with Rule 5 (1) of the CSR Rule further
states:

a. Where a company covered under section 135(1) but is not required to appoint
       an independent director under section 149(4), it shall have in its Corporate
       Social Responsibility Committee two or more directors, without such
       independent director.

b. A private company having only two directors on its Board shall constitute its CSR
       Committee with two such directors

c. A foreign company covered under these rules, the CSR Committee shall comprise
       of at least two persons of which one person shall be as specified under clause

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                    9.49

       (d) of sub-section (1) of section 380 of the Act and another person shall be
       nominated by the foreign company.

Note:
1. Independent Director is defined under section 2(47) of the Act, same is stated

       under chapter 1 of this module.
2. As per section 135(2), the Board's report under sub-section (3) of section 134

       shall disclose the composition of the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee.

Summary of the constitution of CSR Committee in different scenarios

Category  Sub-category                             Constitution

Company   not required to appoint                  Two or more directors, without independent
covered   an independent director                  director
under     under section 149(4)
section                                            Two such directors
135(1)    private company having
          only two directors

          a foreign company                        Least two persons of which one person shall
                                                   be as specified under clause (d) of sub-
                                                   section (1) of section 380 of the Act and
                                                   another person shall be nominated by the
                                                   foreign company

          Not covered in any of                    Three or more directors, out of which at
          sub-categories defined                   least one shall be an independent
          above                                    director.

DUTIES OF CSR COMMITTEE [SUB-SECTION 3 READ WITH RULE 5(2)]

The Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall:

a. Formulate and recommend to the Board, a Corporate Social Responsibility
       Policy which shall indicate the activities to be undertaken by the
       company in areas or subject, specified in Schedule VII;

b. Recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred on the activities
       referred to in above clause; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.50  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

c. Monitor the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the company from time
       to time.

Further, according to Rule 5(2) of Companies (CSR) Rules, 2014, the CSR Committee
shall formulate and recommend to the Board, an annual action plan in pursuance
of its CSR policy, which shall include the following, namely:
a. The list of CSR projects or programmes that are approved to be undertaken

       in areas or subjects specified in Schedule VII of the Act

b. The manner of execution of such projects or programmes as specified in
       sub-rule (1) of rule 4 (itself or through other section 8 company, etc.)

c. The modalities of utilisation of funds and implementation schedules for the
       projects or programmes

d. Monitoring and reporting mechanism for the projects or programmes; and

e. Details of need and impact assessment, if any, for the projects undertaken
       by the company.

Note:
Board may alter such plan at any time during the financial year, as per the
recommendation of its CSR Committee, based on the reasonable justification to
that effect.

DUTIES OF THE BOARD IN RELATION TO CSR [SUB-SECTION 4 READ WITH
RULE 9 OF THE CSR RULES]

The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1) i.e., where CSR
committee required to be constituted, shall,

a. After taking into account the recommendations made by the Corporate Social
       Responsibility Committee, approve the Corporate Social Responsibility
       Policy for the company and

b. Disclose contents of such Policy in its report and

c. Also place it (CSR Policy) along with composition of the CSR committee and
       project approved by board on the company's website; and

d. Ensure that the activities as are included in Corporate Social Responsibility
       Policy of the company are undertaken by the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.51

AMOUNT AND FORM OF CSR EXPENDITURE [SUB-SECTION 5 AND 6
READ WITH RULE 4, 7, AND 10 OF CSR RULES]

The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1) i.e., where CSR
committee required to be constituted, shall ensure that the company spends, in
every financial year, at least two percent of the average net profits of the
company made during the three immediately preceding financial years.

Company shall give preference to the local area and areas around it where it
operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility
activities

The board shall ensure that the administrative overheads shall not exceed five
percent of total CSR expenditure of the company for the financial year.

Where the company has not completed the period of three financial years
since its incorporation

Where the company has not completed the period of three financial years since
its incorporation, the company shall spend, in every financial year, at least two
percent of the average net profits of the company made during such
immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of its Corporate Social
Responsibility Policy.

Illustration 8
Compute the minimum amount that Modern Furniture Limited is required to spend on
account of Corporate Social responsibility year 2022-2023. MFL was incorporated in
August 2020. Net-profit made during the financial years 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 are
` 20 crore, and ` 38 crore respectively.

Options

a. ` 76 lakh

b. ` 1.16 crore

c. ` 58 lakh

d. The company has not completed the period of three financial years since its
       incorporation, hence no CSR spending is required.

Answer ­ c
Reason ­ Section 135(5).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.52  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Surplus arising out of CSR activities [Rule 7(2) of CSR) Rules]
Any surplus arising out of the CSR activities shall:

 Not form part of the business profit of a company

And

 Be ploughed back into the same project or

 Be transferred to the Unspent CSR Account and spent in pursuance of CSR
       policy and annual action plan of the company or

 Transfer such surplus amount to a Fund specified in Schedule VII, within a
       period of six months of the expiry of the financial year.

Where the company spend in excess to minimum prescribed CSR amount
[Second proviso to Section 135(5) read with Rule 7(1)

If the company spends an amount in excess of the requirements provided under
this sub-section, such company may set off such excess amount against the
requirement to spend under this sub-section for up to immediate succeeding
three financial years subject to the conditions that:

a. The excess amount available for set off shall not include the surplus arising
       out of the CSR activities, if any, in pursuance of sub-rule (2) of this rule.

b. The board resolution shall pass to that effect.

Where the company fails to spend minimum prescribed CSR amount [Sub-
section 6 read with Second proviso to Section 135(5)]

If the company fails to spend minimum prescribed CSR amount under section
135(5), the Board shall,

a. Specify the reasons for not spending the amount in board report prepared
       under section 134(3)(o), and

b. Where the unspent amount relates to project/s other than ongoing project,
       then such unspent amount shall be transferred to a Fund specified in
       Schedule VII, within a period of six months of the expiry of the financial year.

                                                       Or

       Where any amount remaining unspent pursuant to any ongoing project
       (undertaken by a company in pursuance of its CSR Policy), then such unspent

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.53

       amount shall be transferred to Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility
       Account by the company within a period of thirty days from the end of the
       financial year.

       Notes

       1. Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account (referred as to
               Unspent CSR Account) shall be operated with Scheduled bank.

       2. Any sum transferred to Unspent CSR Account, shall be spent by the
               company in pursuance of its obligation towards the Corporate Social
               Responsibility Policy within a period of three financial years from the
               date of such transfer.

       3. In case of failure in spending the amount transferred in Unspent CSR
               Account in pursuance of its obligation towards the CSR Policy within a
               period of three financial years from the date of such transfer, the
               company shall transfer the same to a Fund specified in Schedule VII,
               within a period of thirty days from the date of completion of the third
               financial year.

       4. As per rule 10 of CSR Rules, until a fund is specified in Schedule VII for
               the purposes of subsection (5) and (6) of section 135 of the Act, the
               unspent CSR amount, if any, shall be transferred by the company to any
               fund included in schedule VII of the Act.

CSR expenditure for creation or acquisition of a capital Asset [Rule 7(4) of CSR
Rules)

CSR amount may be spent by a company for creation or acquisition of a capital
asset, which shall be held by:

a. A company established under section 8 of the Act, or a Registered Public Trust
       or Registered Society, having charitable objects and CSR Registration Number
       under Rule 4(2); or

b. Beneficiaries of the said CSR project, in the form of self-help groups,
       collectives, entities; or

c. A public authority.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.54  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Note

Any capital asset created by a company prior to the commencement of the
Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) Amendment Rules, 2021, shall
within a period of 180 days from such commencement comply with the requirement
of this rule, which may be extended by a further period of not more than 90 days
with the approval of the Board based on reasonable justification.

                                                   Unspent CSR
                                                      Amount

      Ongoing Projects                                          Other than Ongoing
                                                                        Projects

transferred to Unspent                             transferred to a Fund specified
    Corporate Social                                         in Schedule VII

Responsibility Account                                   within a period of six
                                                       months of the expiry of
within a period of thirty
 days from the end of                                      the financial year

   the financial year.

   shall be spent by the company in pursuance of its
obligation towards the Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy within a period of three financial years from the

                      date of such transfer

      IF Failed

     the company shall transfer the same to a Fund
specified in Schedule VII, within a period of thirty days
from the date of completion of the third financial year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                          9.55

CSR IMPLEMENTATION [RULE 4 OF THE CSR RULES]

CSR activities can be undertaken by company itself or through specified
entities ­ Onus (or ultimate responsibility) lies on Board [Sub-rule 1]

The Board shall ensure that the CSR activities are undertaken by the company itself
or through:

a. Connected charitable entity - A company established under section 8 of the
       Act, or a registered public trust or a registered society, exempted under sub-
       clauses (iv), (v), (vi) or (via) of clause (23C) of section 10 or registered under
       section 12A and approved under 80 G of the Income Tax Act, 1961,
       established by the company, either singly or along with any other company;
       or

b. Entity established by Government ­ A company established under section
       8 of the Act or a registered trust or a registered society, established by the
       Central Government or State Government; or

c. Statutory entity - Any statutory body established under an Act of Parliament
       or a State legislature to undertake activities covered in Schedule VII of the
       Act; or

d. Any Charitable entity with three year of experience - A company
       established under section 8 of the Act, or a registered public trust or a
       registered society, exempted under sub-clauses (iv), (v), (vi) or (via) of clause
       (23C) of section 10 or registered under section 12A and approved under 80
       G of the Income Tax Act, 1961, and having an established track record of at
       least three years in undertaking similar activities.

Notes:

1. CSR activities should be undertaken by the companies in project/ programme
       mode. One-off events such as marathons/ awards/ charitable contribution/
       advertisement/ sponsorships of TV programmes etc. would not be qualified as
       CSR expenditure.15

15 MCA vide General Circular No. 21/2014 dated 18th June 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.56  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

2. Expenses incurred by companies for the fulfillment of any Act/ Statute of
       regulations (such as Labour Laws, Land Acquisition Act etc.) would not count
       as CSR expenditure under the Companies Act.

3. Registered Trust would include Trusts registered under Income Tax Act 1961,
       for those states where registration of Trust is not mandatory.

4. Contribution to Corpus of a Trust/ society/ section 8 companies etc. will
       qualify as CSR expenditure as long as (a) the Trust/ society/ section 8
       companies etc. is created exclusively for undertaking CSR activities or (b)
       where the corpus is created exclusively for a purpose directly relatable to a
       subject covered in Schedule VII of the Act.

Registration of undertake CSR activity [Sub-rule 2]

Every entity, covered under sub-rule (1), who intends to undertake any CSR activity,
shall register itself with the Central Government by filing the form CSR-1
electronically with the Registrar, with effect from the 01st day of April 2021.

The provisions of this sub-rule shall not affect the CSR projects or programmes
approved prior to the 01st day of April 2021.

Form CSR-1 shall be signed and submitted electronically by the entity and shall be
verified digitally by a Chartered Accountant in practice or a Company Secretary in
practice or a Cost Accountant in practice.

On the submission of the Form CSR-1 on the portal, a unique CSR Registration
Number shall be generated by the system automatically.

International Organisations may be engaged [Sub-rule 3]

A company may engage international organisations for designing, monitoring
and evaluation of the CSR projects or programmes as per its CSR policy as well as
for capacity building of their own personnel for CSR.

Note:

Expenditure incurred by Foreign Holding Company for CSR activities in India will
qualify as CSR spending of the Indian subsidiary, if, the CSR expenditures are routed
through Indian subsidiaries and if the Indian subsidiary is required to do so as per
section 135 of the Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.57

CSR projects can be undertaken in collaboration [Sub-rule 4]

A company may also collaborate with other companies for undertaking projects or
programmes or CSR activities in such a manner that the CSR committees of
respective companies are in a position to report separately on such projects or
programmes in accordance with these rules.

Onus to ensure application fund lies on Board [Sub-rule 5]

The Board of a company shall satisfy itself that the funds so disbursed have been
utilised for the purposes and in the manner as approved by it and the Chief
Financial Officer or the person responsible for financial management shall
certify to the effect.

Board shall monitor ongoing projects [Sub-rule 6]

In case of ongoing project, the Board of a Company shall monitor the
implementation of the project with reference to the approved timelines and year-
wise allocation and shall be competent to make modifications, if any, for smooth
implementation of the project within the overall permissible time period.

Illustration 9

Can an international organisation be engaged for implementation of CSR project?

Answer

Yes, an international organisation may be engaged for implementation of CSR
projects; but engagement shall be restricted to the designing, monitoring and
evaluation of the CSR projects or programmes as per its CSR policy as well as for
capacity building of their own personnel for CSR, as per rule 4(3) of CSR rules.
CSR REPORTING [RULE 8 OF CSR RULES]

Annual Reporting on CSR as part of Board Report [Sub-Rule 1 and 2]

The Board's Report of a company (that covered under these rules, basically those
required to constitute CSR committee) pertaining to any financial year shall include
an annual report on CSR containing particulars.

While as per sub-rule 2, in case of a foreign company, the balance sheet filed under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 381 of the Act, shall contain an annual report
on CSR.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.58  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Note:

Annexure I and II are provided to the CSR rules as format for such annual reporting.

Annexure I provides the format for the annual report on CSR activities to be
included in the board's report for financial year commencing before the 1st day of
April, 2020.

While Annexure II prescribes the format for the annual report on CSR activities to
be included in the board's report for financial year commencing on or after the 1st
day of April, 2020.

Impact Assessment [Sub-Rule 3]

Every company having average CSR obligation of ten crore rupees or more in
pursuance of section 135(5) of the Act, in the three immediately preceding financial
years, shall undertake impact assessment, through an independent agency, of their
CSR projects having outlays of one crore rupees or more, and which have been
completed not less than one year before undertaking the impact study.

The impact assessment reports shall be placed before the Board and shall be
annexed to the annual report on CSR.

A Company undertaking impact assessment may book the expenditure towards
Corporate Social Responsibility for that financial year, which shall not exceed two
percent of the total CSR expenditure for that financial year or fifty lakh rupees,
whichever is higher.

Penal Provisions [Sub-section 7]

If a company is in default in complying with the provisions of sub-section (5) or
sub-section (6), the company shall be liable to a penalty of twice the amount
required to be transferred by the company to the Fund specified in Schedule VII or
the Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account, as the case may be, or one
crore rupees, whichever is less, and every officer of the company who is in default
shall be liable to a penalty of one-tenth of the amount required to be transferred
by the company to such Fund specified in Schedule VII, or the Unspent Corporate
Social Responsibility Account, as the case may be, or two lakh rupees, whichever is
less.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                    ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES          9.59

Summary of penalties, if a company is in default in complying with the
provisions of sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to section 135:

Liable              Penalty

Company             twice the amount required to be transferred by the company
                    to the Fund specified in Schedule VII or the Unspent
                    Corporate Social Responsibility Account, as the case may be,
                    or one crore rupees, whichever is less

Every officer, who  one-tenth of the amount required to be transferred by the
is in default       company to such Fund specified in Schedule VII, or the
                    Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account, as the
                    case may be, or two lakh rupees, whichever is less

SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT [SUB-
SECTION 8]

The Central Government may give such general or special directions to a company
or class of companies as it considers necessary to ensure compliance of provisions
of this section and such company or class of companies shall comply with such
directions.

Activities specified under the Schedule VII

Activities which may be included by companies in their CSR Policies (i.e., Activities
as specified under Schedule VII) are as follows:

i. Eradicating hunger, poverty and malnutrition, promoting health care
       including preventive health care and sanitation including contribution to the
       Swach Bharat Kosh set-up by the Central Government for the promotion of
       sanitation and making available safe drinking water;

ii. Promoting education, including special education and employment
       enhancing vocation skills especially among children, women, elderly, and the
       differently abled and livelihood enhancement projects;

iii. Promoting gender equality, empowering women, setting up homes and
       hostels for women and orphans; setting up old age homes, day care centres
       and such other facilities for senior citizens and measures for reducing
       inequalities faced by socially and economically backward groups;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.60  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

iv. Ensuring environmental sustainability, ecological balance, protection of flora
       and fauna, animal welfare, agroforestry, conservation of natural resources and
       maintaining quality of soil, air and water including contribution to the Clean
       Ganga Fund set up by the Central Government for rejuvenation of river
       Ganga;

v. Protection of national heritage, art and culture including restoration of
       buildings and sites of historical importance and works of art; setting up public
       libraries; promotion and development of traditional arts and handicrafts;

vi. Measures for the benefit of armed forces veterans, war widows and their
       dependents, Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) and Central Para Military
       Forces (CPMF) veterans, and their dependents including widows;

vii. Training to promote rural sports, nationally recognised sports, paralympic
       sports and Olympic sports;

viii. Contribution to the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund or Prime Minister's
       Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency situations Fund (PM CARES FUND)
       any other fund set up by the Central Government for socio-economic
       development and relief and welfare of the Scheduled Castes, Tribes, other
       backward classes, minorities and women;

ix. (a) Contribution to incubators or research development projects in the field
               of science, technology, engineering and medicine, funded by Central
               Government or State Government or any agency or Public Sector
               Undertaking of Central Government or State Government, and

       (b) Contributions to public funded Universities; Indian Institute of
               Technology (IITs); National Laboratories and Autonomous Bodies
               established under Department of Atomic Energy (DAE); Department of
               Biotechnology (DBT); Department of Science and Technology (DST);
               Department of Pharmaceuticals; Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and
               Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH); Ministry of
               Electronics and Information Technology and other bodies, namely Defense
               Research and Development Organisation (DRDO);Indian Council of
               Agricultural Research (ICAR); Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
               Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), engaged in conducting
               research in science, technology, engineering and medicine aimed at
               promoting Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs);

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                          9.61

x. Rural development projects;

xi. Slum area development. [For the purposes of this item, the term `slum area'
       shall mean any area declared as such by the Central Government or any State
       Government or any other competent authority under any law for the time
       being in force.]

xii. Disaster management, including relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction
       activities.

Students are advised to take note:

The statutory provision and provisions of CSR Rules, 2014, is to ensure that while
activities undertaken in pursuance of the CSR policy must be relatable to Schedule VII
of the Companies Act, 2013, the entries in the said Schedule VII must be interpreted
liberally so as to capture the essence of the subjects enumerated in the said Schedule.
The items enlisted in the amended Schedule VII of the Act, are broad-based and are
intended to cover a wide range of activities16.

Practical Insight

Clarifications with respect to CSR on COVID

Outbreak of novel corona virus (COVID-19 or COVID) threatened the entire
mankind with severe social and economic consequences. COVID was declared
pandemic by WHO and national disaster by GoI. The prevention from widespread
of COVID and combating against same was possible only with war-footing efforts
of all including businesses and corporates. Hence CSR funds/expenditure required
to be channelised towards activities that are part of prevention and support
mechanism; therefore in order to give effect to the same following clarifications in
form of circulars are issued by MCA;

General Circular No. 10/2020, dated 23rd March, 2020

The spending of CSR funds for COVID-19 is eligible CSR activity. Funds may be
spent for various activities related to COVID-19 under item nos. (i) and (xii) of
Schedule VII of the Act, relating to promotion of health care, including preventive
health care and sanitation, and, disaster management.

16 MCA vide General Circular No. 21/2014 dated 18th June 2014

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.62  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

General Circular No. 01/2021, dated 13th January, 2021

The spending of CSR funds for awareness campaigns/ programmes and public
outreach on COVID-19 Vaccination programme is an eligible CSR activity under
item no. (i), (ii) and (xii) of Schedule VII of the Act, relating to promotion of health
care, including preventive health care and sanitization, promoting education, and,
disaster management respectively.

General Circular No. 05/2021, dated 22nd April, 2021

The spending of CSR funds for setting up makeshift hospitals and temporary
COVID Care facilities is an eligible CSR activity under item nos. (i) and (xii) of
Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 relating to promotion of health care,
including preventive health care, and, disaster management respectively.

General Circular No. 09/2021, dated 5th May, 2021

The spending of CSR funds for `creating health infrastructure for COVID care',
`establishment of medical oxygen generation and storage plants',
`manufacturing and supply of Oxygen concentrators, ventilators, cylinders
and other medical equipment for countering COVID-19' or similar such
activities are eligible CSR activities under item nos. (i) and (xii) of Schedule VII of
the Companies Act, 2013 relating to promotion of health care, including preventive
health care, and, disaster management respectively.

Reference is also drawn to item no. (ix) of Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013
which permits contribution to specified research and development projects as well
as contribution to public funded universities and certain Organisations engaged in
conducting research in science, technology, engineering, and medicine as eligible
CSR activities.

The companies including Government companies may undertake the activities or
projects or programmes using CSR funds, directly by themselves or in collaboration
as shared responsibility with other companies, subject to fulfilment of CSR Rules
and the guidelines issued by MCA from time to time.

General Circular 13/2021, dated 30th July, 2021

The spending of CSR funds of COVID- 19 vaccination for persons other than the
employees and their families, is an eligible CSR activity under item no. (i) of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                   9.63

Schedule VII of the Act relating to promotion of health care including preventive
health care and item no. (xii) relating to disaster management.

MCA Office Memorandum Dated 28th March 2021

Any contribution made to PM CARES Fund shall qualify as CSR expenditure for
purpose of section 135 of this Act.

Practical Insight

Clarifications with respect to CSR on `Har Ghar Tiranga' campaign
General Circular 08/2022, dated 26th July, 2022

`Har Ghar Tiranga', a campaign under the aegis of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, is
aimed to invoke the feeling of patriotism in the hearts of the people and to promote
awareness about the Indian National Flag.

In this regard, it is clarified that spending of CSR funds for the activities related to
this campaign, such as mass scale production and supply of the National Flag,
outreach and amplification efforts and other related activities, are eligible CSR
activities under item no. (ii) of Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 pertaining
to promotion of education relating to culture.

In case of specified IFSC public company17 and specified IFSC private company18 the
section 135 shall not apply for period of 5 years from the commencement of business
of a specified IFSC public company and specified IFSC private company.

After reading the provisions pertaining to CSR, a genuine question may strike in
your mind: why were a plethora of changes introduced in 2020-2021? CSR rules
almost re-written; but why?

The COVID management to some extent highlighted the pitfalls in public
infrastructure facilities, whereas CSR could play a drastic role in improving such
facilities, provided accountability is tagged with a full-proof mechanism, hence
need to consolidate the CSR provisions was felt and secondly, the CSR numbers
(tabled below)19 didn't show convincing and steady growth.

17 Vide notification GSR 08(E) dated 4th January, 2017
18 Vide notification GSR 09(E) dated 4th January, 2017
19 Only for information of the students.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         9.64  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

  Year   No. of CSR Projects  No. of Corporates  CSR Expenditure (in Cr. )
2020-21           8,009               1,619                   8,828
2019-20          34,828              22,531                   24,689
2018-19          32,248              25,099                   20,150
2017-18          26,858              21,517                   17,098
2016-17          23,076              19,552                   14,344

     11. RIGHT OF MEMBERS TO COPIES OF AUDITED
          FINANCIAL STATEMENT [SECTION 136]

Section 136 read with Rule 10 and 11 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules 2014,
confirms a right of members to copies of audited financial statements and prescribe
the manner of circulation of financial statement. Relevant provisions are detailed
below:
WHAT, TO WHOM, WHEN & HOW [SUB-SECTION 1 AND 2 READ
WITH RULE 10 AND 11 OF THE COMPANIES (ACCOUNTS) RULES 2014]

What required to be circulated?
A copy of financial statements including

a. Consolidated financial statement, if any,

b. Auditor's report and

c. Every other document required by law to be annexed or attached to the
       financial statements, which are to be laid before a company in its general
       meeting.

Proviso to sub-section 2 provides that every company having a subsidiary or
subsidiaries shall provide a copy of separate audited or unaudited financial
statements, as the case may be, as prepared in respect of each of its subsidiary to
any member of the company who asks for it.

To whom copies shall be sent?

a. To every member of the company,

b. To every trustee for the debenture-holder of any debentures issued by the
       company, and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                       9.65

c. To all persons other than such member or trustee, being the person so
       entitled.

When (timing) to send?

At least twenty-one days before the date of the meeting.

First proviso to section 136(1) provides, even if the copies of the documents are
sent less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting, they shall be
deemed to have been duly sent if it is so agreed by members:

a. if the company has a share capital ­ holding majority in number entitled
       to vote and who represent not less than ninety-five percent of such part of
       the paid-up share capital of the company as gives a right to vote at the
       meeting;

                                                       Or

b. if the company has no share capital - having not less than ninety-five
       percent of the total voting power exercisable at the meeting

Students are advised to take note:
In case of section 8 company the words "twenty-one days", shall be substituted
by the words "fourteen days".20

Mode and Manner of Circulation [Rule 11 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules,
2014]

Third Proviso to Section 136 (1) empowers central government to prescribe the
manner of circulation of financial statements of companies having such net worth
and turnover.

In this regard, Rule 11 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 states the financial
statements, in case of all listed companies, and

Such public companies which have a net worth of more than one crore rupees
and turnover of more than ten crore rupees, may be sent:

a. By electronic mode to such members only whose

20 Vide Notification No. GSR 466 (E), dated 5th June, 2015

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.66  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Shareholding is in Whose email are registered with

dematerialized format                              Depository for communication purposes

Shareholding is in                                 But they have positively consented in
Otherwise than by                                  writing for receiving by electronic mode
dematerialized format                              (this may not be relevant considering that
                                                   shareholding is not held otherwise than by
                                                   dematerialized form anymore)

b. By dispatch of physical copies through any recognised mode of delivery as
       specified under section 20 of the Act, in all other cases.

Statement containing Salient Features may be circulated by Listed Company

Second proviso to section 136(1) provides that in the case of a listed company,
the provisions of this sub-section shall be deemed to be complied with:

a. If the copies of the documents are made available for inspection at its
       registered office during working hours for a period of twenty-one days
       before the date of the meeting and

b. A statement containing the salient features of such documents in the
       Form AOC-3 (Form AOC-3A in case of companies which are required to
       comply with Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015) or copies
       of the documents, as the company may deem fit, is sent to every member
       of the company and to every trustee for the holders of any debentures
       issued by the company not less than twenty-one days before the date of
       the meeting

c. Unless the shareholders ask for full financial statements.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                   ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                    9.67

Summary

               Copies of audited FS + CFS (if any) + Audit Report + other document

                                                   Sent to

Every member       Every trustee for debenture holder       Other entitled persons

                   At least 21 days before GM

                   Circulation of Financial statement

Listed companies   Public co. (Net worth > 1 crore and Turn over > 10 crore)

Electronic mode    Dispatch of physical copies (under Section 20)

  Shareholders     Shareholders not holding shares in       In all other cases
holding shares in     Demat form (not relevant any
                          more) + Consent given
   Demat form

Hosting on website

Fourth and Fifth Proviso to section 136(1) provides that a listed company shall also
on its website, (which is maintained by or on behalf of the company) place its
financial statements including:

a. Consolidated financial statements, if any,

b. Separate audited accounts in respect of each of subsidiary, if any

c. All other documents required to be attached thereto,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.68      CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Students are advised to take note that sixth proviso to Section 136(1) in this
context provides that a listed company that has a subsidiary incorporated outside
India (referred as to foreign subsidiary),

Category                                           Requirement

a. Where such foreign subsidiary                   The requirement of this proviso shall be met
is statutorily required to                         if such consolidated financial statement of
prepare consolidated financial                     such foreign subsidiary is placed on the
statement under any law of the                     website of the listed company.
country of its incorporation

b. where such foreign subsidiary                   The holding Indian listed company may
is not required to get its                         place such unaudited financial statement
financial statement audited                        on its website
under any law of the country of
its incorporation and which does                                              and
not get such financial statement
audited                                            Where such financial statement is in a
                                                   language other than English, a translated
                                                   copy of the financial statement in English
                                                   shall also be placed on the website.

Illustration 10

RELM Industries Limited, a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013,
has its shares listed on a recognized Stock Exchange in India. One of the subsidiaries
of RELM Industries Limited is a foreign company incorporated outside India. In the
annual general meeting of the company, RELM Industries Limited has placed its
audited financial statement including consolidated financial statement on its website.
RELM Industries Limited has also placed on its website separate audited accounts of
all its subsidiaries located in India except one subsidiary, which is a foreign company
and located outside India on the grounds that such foreign company is not required
to get its financial statement audited under the company law of its country of
incorporation. You are required to examine whether RELM Industries Limited has
complied with the provisions of section 136?

Answer

No, RELM Industries Limited has not complied with the provisions of section 136
because RELM Industries Limited is also required to place unaudited financial

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                       9.69

statement of its foreign subsidiary on its website even if such foreign subsidiary is
not required to get its financial statement audited as per the provisions of section
136. The holding Indian listed company (RELM Industries Limited in this case) may
place such unaudited financial statement on its website and where such financial
statement is in a language other than English, a translated copy of the financial
statement in English shall also be placed on the website.

In case of Nidhi company21

Section 136 (1) shall apply, subject to the modification that, in the case of members
who do not individually or jointly hold shares of more than one thousand rupees
in face value or more than one per cent, of the total paid-up share capital,
whichever is less, it shall be sufficient compliance with the provisions of the section
if an intimation is sent by public notice in newspaper circulated in the district in
which the Registered Office of the company is situated stating the date, time and
venue of AGM and the financial statement with its enclosures can be inspected at
the registered office of the company and the financial statement with enclosures
are affixed in the notice board of the company and a member is entitled to vote
either in person or through proxy.

INSPECTION [SUB-SECTION 2]

A company shall also allow every member or trustee of the holder of any
debentures issued by the company to inspect the documents stated under sub-
section (1) at its registered office during business hours.

CONTRAVENTION [SUB-SECTION 3]

If any default is made in complying with the provisions of section 136,

a. The company shall be liable to a penalty of 25,000 rupees and

b. Every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of
       5,000 Rupees.

Vide General Circular No. 11/2015, dated 21 July 2015, clarification was issued
by MCA with regard to circulation and filing of financial statement.

21 Vide Notification No. GSR 465 (E), dated 5th June, 2015

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.70  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

1. A company holding general meeting after giving shorter notice as provided
       under section 101 of the Act may also circulate financial statements (to be
       laid/ considered in the same general meeting) at such shorter notice.

2. The format of accounts of foreign subsidiaries should be, as far as possible,
       in accordance with requirements under the Companies Act, 2013. In case this
       is not possible, a statement indicating the reasons for deviation may be
       placed/ filed along with such accounts.

     12. COPY OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT TO BE
          FILED WITH REGISTRAR [SECTION 137]

This section provides that copies of financial statement including consolidated
financial statement, if any, along with all the documents annexed to financial
statement shall be filed with Registrar.

WHERE AGM CONVENED [SUB-SECTION 1 READ WITH RULE 12 OF
THE COMPANIES (ACCOUNTS) RULES 2014 AND RULE 3 OF THE
COMPANIES (FILING OF DOCUMENTS AND FORMS IN EXTENSIBLE
BUSINESS REPORTING LANGUAGE) RULES, 2015

What is required to be filed with registrar?

A copy of financial statements including

a. Consolidated financial statement, if any,

b. Along with all the documents which are required to be or attached to such
       financial statements under this Act,

c. Duly adopted at the annual general meeting of the company, shall be filed
       with the Registrar.

By when required to be filed?

Within thirty days of the date of annual general meeting except in case of OPC.

One Person Company (not require to conducted AGM) shall file a copy of the
financial statements duly adopted by its member, along with all the documents
which are required to be attached to such financial statements, within one hundred
eighty days from the closure of the financial year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES  9.71

Mode, Manner and Form of filing

Every company shall file the financial statement with Registrar together with
applicable form as specified below along-with such fee or additional fee as
prescribe by Companies (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014:

a. Rule 12(1) of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 states every company
       shall file the financial statement with Registrar together with Form AOC-4 and
       the consolidated financial statement, if any with Form AOC-4. CFS.

b. Further rule 12(1A) states every Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) that
       is required to comply with Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) shall file the
       financial statements with Registrar together with Form AOC-4 NBFC (Ind AS)
       and the consolidated financial statement, if any, with Form AOC-4 CFS NBFC
       (Ind AS).

c. Rule 12 (1B) requires that every company covered under the provisions of
       sub-section (1) to section 135 shall furnish a report on Corporate Social
       Responsibility in Form CSR-2 to the Registrar for the preceding financial year
       (2020-2021) and onwards as an addendum to Form AOC-4 or AOC-4 XBRL or
       AOC-4 NBFC (Ind AS), as the case may be.

d. Rule 12 (1C) ­ Every company, along with the relevant e-Form No. AOC-
       4, AOC-4 CFS, AOC-4 XBRL, AOC-4 NBFC (Ind AS) or AOC-4 CFS NBFC
       (Ind AS) and the respective attachments in portable document format as
       required, shall also file e-Form Extract of Board Report, Extract of
       Auditor`s Report (Standalone) and Extract of Auditor`s Report
       (Consolidated), as the case may be:

       Provided that a copy of signed financial statements duly authenticated
       as per section 134 of the Act (including Board`s report, auditors` report
       and other documents) in portable document format shall also be
       attached with XBRL Forms.

e. Rule 3(1) of the Companies (Filing of Documents and Forms in Extensible
       Business Reporting Language) Rules, 2015 states that, the following class of
       companies shall file their financial statements & other documents under
       section 137 of the Act with the Registrar in e-form AOC-4 XBRL as per
       Annexure-I

       (i) companies listed with stock exchanges in India and their Indian
               subsidiaries;

       (ii) Companies having paid up capital of five crore rupees or above;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.72  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (iii) companies having turnover of one hundred crore rupees or above;

       (iv) All companies which are required to prepare their financial statements
               in accordance with Companies (Indian Accounting Standards)
               Rules, 2015

       Rule 3(1A) of the Companies (Filing of Documents and Forms in
       Extensible Business Reporting Language) Rules, 2015 ­ The companies
       which have filed their financial statements under sub-rule (1), shall also
       attach a copy of signed financial statements duly authenticated as
       specified in section 134 of the Act (including Board's report, auditors'
       report and other documents) in PDF format in eForm AOC-4 XBRL.

The companies which have filed their financial statements under Rule 3(1) of the
Companies (Filing of Documents and Forms in Extensible Business Reporting
Language) Rules, 2015 and erstwhile rules (i.e., the Companies (Filing of Documents
and Forms in Extensible Business Reporting Language) Rules, 2011) shall continue to
file their financial statements and other documents though they may not fall under
the class of companies specified therein in succeeding years. Meaning thereby
once company started reporting in XBRL format shall continue to report in
XBRL format in succeeding years also, even if criteria mentioned above is not
met in succeeding years.

Example 3

Amazon Company Limited, a company incorporated under the Companies Act,
2013, has a turnover of ` 150 crore and ` 90 crore during the financial year ended
31st March 2023 and 31st March 2024 respectively. Now Amazon Company Limited
shall continue to file the financial statements and other documents under section 137
in e-form AOC-4 XBRL for the financial year ended 31st March 2024 even if the
company does not fall in the class of companies provided under Rule 3 of the
Companies (Filing of documents and forms in Extensible Business Reporting Language)
Rules, 2015.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                      ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                    9.73

Summary of Form and Manner of Filing

Category                                           Standalone     Consolidated
                                                                     Financial

                                                               Statement (if any)

1. Companies listed with stock exchanges           Shall mandatorily file their financial
in India and their Indian subsidiaries;            statement in Extensible Business
                                                   Reporting Language (XBRL) format
2. Companies having paid up capital of             in e-form AOC-4 XBRL
five crore rupees or above;
                                                   Using the Taxonomy provided in
3. Companies having turnover of one                Annexure-II of the Companies
hundred crore rupees or above;                     (Filing of Documents and Forms in
                                                   Extensible Business Reporting
4. All companies which are required to             Language) Rules, 2015, if preparing
prepare their financial statements in              their financial statements as per the
accordance with the Companies (Indian              Companies (Accounting Standards)
Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015                  Rules, 2021

Note - Non-banking financial companies,            Using the Taxonomy provided in
Housing finance companies and                      Annexure-II A of the Companies
Companies engaged in the business of               (Filing of Documents and Forms in
banking and insurance sector are                   Extensible Business Reporting
exempted from filing of financial                  Language) Rules, 2015, if preparing
statements under the Companies (Filing of          their financial statements as per
Documents and Forms in Extensible                  Companies (Indian Accounting
Business Reporting Language) Rules, 2015           Standards) Rules, 2015
i.e., in XBRL format

Non-Banking Financial Company that is AOC-4 NBFC AOC-4 CFS NBFC

required to comply with Indian (Ind AS)                        (Ind AS)

Accounting Standards

Every Other Company not covered above Form AOC-4 Form AOC-4 CFS

Every company covered under the                    Shall furnish a report on CSR in
provisions of sub-section (1) to section           Form CSR-2 as an addendum to the
135 i.e., Corporate Social Responsibility          applicable form (out of those stated
(CSR)                                              above, as the case may be).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.74  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

If the financial statements are not adopted:

First proviso to Section 137(1) provides that where the financial statements are
not adopted at AGM or adjourned AGM, such un-adopted financial statements
along with the required documents shall be filed with the Registrar within 30 days
of the date of AGM.

The Registrar shall take them in his records as provisional till the financial statements
are filed with him after their adoption in the adjourned AGM for that purpose.

Further, second proviso to Section 137(1) provides, if the financial statements are
adopted in the adjourned AGM, then they shall be filed with the Registrar within
30 days of the date of such adjourned AGM with such fees or such additional fees
as may be prescribed.

Company having subsidiaries:

Fourth proviso to Section 137(1) provides a company shall, along with its financial
statements to be filed with the Registrar, attach the accounts of its subsidiary or
subsidiaries which have been incorporated outside India and which have not
established their place of business in India.

Fifth proviso to Section 137(1) provides in the case of a subsidiary which has
been incorporated outside India (herein referred to as "foreign subsidiary"), which
is not required to get its financial statement audited under any law of the country
of its incorporation and which does not get such financial statement audited, the
requirements of the fourth proviso shall be met if the holding Indian company files
such unaudited financial statement along with a declaration to this effect.

But where such financial statement is in a language other than English, along with
a translated copy of the financial statement in English.

The format of accounts of foreign subsidiaries should be, as far as possible, in
accordance with requirements under the Companies Act, 2013. In case this is not
possible, a statement indicating the reasons for deviation may be placed/ filed
along with such accounts.22

22 vide General Circular no. 11/2015 dated 21 July 2015

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.75

Illustration 11

Vandana Ltd., based in India, has many subsidiaries in India and outside India. It also
had associates and joint ventures. For the purpose of finalization of the consolidated
financial statements of the company for the year ended 31st March 2024, the
company's management requested its foreign subsidiary, based out of Italy, to
provide its standalone financial statements. The Italian subsidiary company prepares
its financial statements in the local language of the country and the same is provided
to the Indian parent company as unaudited as the audit is not required by the Italian
subsidiary company. Please advise how the Indian parent should deal with this
financial statement.

Answer

Vandana Ltd. would have to get the standalone financial statements of Italian
subsidiary company translated in English language and also get those aligned as
per its accounting policies for the purpose of consolidation.

Further, as per the requirements of section 137(1) of the Companies Act, 2013,
Vandana Ltd. would need to file such unaudited financial statement of Italian
subsidiary company along with a declaration to this effect along with a translated
copy of the financial statement in English.

Further, the format of accounts of Italian subsidiary company should be, as far as
possible, in accordance with requirements under the Companies Act, 2013. In case
this is not possible, a statement indicating the reasons for deviation may be placed/
filed along with such accounts.

ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING NOT HELD [SUB-SECTION 2]

Where the AGM of a company for any year has not been held, the financial
statements along with the documents required to be attached, duly signed along
with the statement of facts and reasons for not holding the AGM shall be filed with
the Registrar within thirty days of the last date before which the AGM should have
been held and in such manner, with such fees or additional fees as may be
prescribed.

Illustration 12

The AGM of R Ltd., for laying the Annual Accounts there at for the year ended 31
March 2024, was not held. What remedy is available with the company regarding
compliance of the provisions of section 137 of the Companies Act, 2013 for filing of
copies of financial statements with the Registrar of Companies?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.76                   CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Answer

In the present case, though AGM was not held, it ought to be held by 30 September
2024 under sections 96 of the Companies Act, 2013.

Therefore, under the provisions of section 137(2), the financial statements along
with the documents required to be attached under this Act, duly signed along with
the statement of facts and reasons for not holding the AGM shall be filed with the
Registrar within thirty days of the last date before which the AGM should have been
held i.e. by 30 October 2024 along with such fees or additional fees as may be
prescribed.

Summary of Sub-section 1 and 2 to section 137

                                                                          AGM

         Held [137(1)]                                    Not held [137(2)]

 [Copy of FS + CFS + other                             Prescribed documents +
documents to be presented]:                        Statement of Facts & Reasons

    Prescribed documents                                for not holding AGM

Adopted Un- adopted in AGM/ Adjourned AGM          File with ROC

 Filed with registrar  Filed within 30 days of     Within 30 days of the
within 30 days of the   AGM. Registrar takes       last date before which
                       them as Provisional in      the AGM should have
     date of AGM
                             their records                 been held

                          Further adopted in
                        Adjourned AGM - filed
                       with Registrar within 30
                       days of the said meeting

Illustration 13 (In continuation to above illustration)

Will it make any difference in case the Annual Accounts were duly laid before
the AGM held on 27 September 2024 but the same were not adopted by the
shareholders?

Answer

Since the AGM has been held in time on 27 September 2024, the un-adopted financial
statements along with the required documents under sub-section (1) of section 137

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                                     9.77

shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days of the date of AGM and the Registrar
shall take them in his records as provisional till the financial statements are filed with
him after its adoption in the adjourned AGM for that purpose.

PENALTY [SUB-SECTION 3]

If any of the provisions of section 137 is contravened, then;

The company shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees and in case of
continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day
during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees;
and

The managing director and the Chief Financial Officer of the company, if any, and,
in the absence of the managing director and the Chief Financial Officer, any other
director who is charged by the Board with the responsibility of complying with the
provisions of this section, and, in the absence of any such director, all the directors
of the company, shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees, and in case
of continuing failure, with further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day
after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of fifty
thousand rupees.

Summary of penalty provisions

Person liable                                      Penalty

Company                                            Fine of ` 10,000 and

                                                   In case of continuing failure, with a
                                                   further penalty of ` 100 for each day
                                                   during which such failure continues,
                                                   subject to a maximum of ` 2 lakh.

MD and CFO of the company, if any;                 Fine of ` 10,000 and

                 In their absence                  In case of continuing failure, with a
                                                   further penalty of ` 100 for each day
Any other director who is charged by the           during which such failure continues,
Board with the responsibility;                     subject to a maximum of ` 50,000.

                  In its absence

All the directors of the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.78  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

     13. INTERNAL AUDIT [SECTION 138]

Section 138 read with Rule 13 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules 2014, provides
for internal audit in a company.

COMPANIES REQUIRED TO APPOINT INTERNAL AUDITOR [SUB-
SECTION 1 READ WITH RULE 13(1) OF COMPANIES (ACCOUNTS)
RULES, 2014]

a. Every listed company;

b. Every unlisted public company having;

       i. Paid up share capital of fifty crore rupees or more during the
               preceding financial year; or

       ii. Turnover of two hundred crore rupees or more during the preceding
               financial year; or

       iii. Outstanding loans or borrowings from banks or public financial
               institutions exceeding one hundred crore rupees or more at any point
               of time during the preceding financial year; or

       iv. Outstanding deposits of twenty-five crore rupees or more at any
               point of time during the preceding financial year; and

c. Every private company having

       i. Turnover of two hundred crore rupees or more during the preceding
               financial year; or

       ii. Outstanding loans or borrowings from banks or public financial
               institutions exceeding one hundred crore rupees or more at any point
               of time during the preceding financial year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                               ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES           9.79

Summary of Rule 13(1) of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014

Companies required to appoint        Listed co.         Paid up share capital 50 cr. or more
   internal auditor            Unlisted public co.                      during P.F.Y

                                                       Turn over 200 cr or more during P.F.Y

                                                     Outstanding loan/borrowing from banks
                                                      or PFI exceeding100 cr or more at any
                                                               point of time during P.F.Y

                                                    Outstanding deposits 25 cr or more at any
                                                               point of time during P.F.Y

                                                    Turn over 200 cr or more during P.F.Y

                               Private Co.             Outstanding loans/ borrowings from
                                                    banks or PFI exceeding 100 crore or more

                                                          at any point of time during P.F.Y

Note: An existing company covered under any of the above criteria shall comply
with the requirements of section 138 and this rule within 6 months of
commencement of such section.

WHO CAN BE APPOINTED AS INTERNAL AUDITOR? [SUB-SECTION 1
READ WITH RULE 13(1) OF COMPANIES (ACCOUNTS) RULES, 2014]

Sub-section 1 to section 138 states that internal auditor shall either be-

a. A chartered accountant or

b. A cost accountant or
c. Such other professional as may be decided by the Board to conduct internal

       audit of the functions and activities of the company.

Students are advised to take note:
The term "Chartered Accountant" or "Cost Accountant" shall mean a "Chartered
Accountant" or a "Cost Accountant", as the case may be, whether engaged in
practice or not'.
The internal auditor may or may not be an employee of the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.80  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

MANNER AND INTERVAL OF INTERNAL AUDIT [SUB-SECTION 2 READ
WITH RULE 13(2) OF COMPANIES (ACCOUNTS) RULES, 2014]

Sub-section2 to section 138 empowers central government to draw rules, to prescribe
the manner and the intervals in which the internal audit shall be conducted and
reported to the Board.

In this regard, Rule 13(2) of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 states the Audit
Committee of the company or the Board shall, in consultation with the Internal Auditor,
formulate the scope, functioning, periodicity and methodology for conducting the
internal audit.

In case of a specified IFSC public company23 and specified IFSC private company24
the section 138 shall apply if the articles of the company provide for the same.

Illustration 14

Perfect Ltd is a listed company. The company is in the business of manufacturing of
steel and had its head office at Karnataka. The company's operations are spread out
across India. The company appointed a firm of Chartered Accountants, N & Co. LLP,
as its internal auditors for the year ended 31st March 2024. However, for the financial
year 2024-25, the company is planning to have an in-house internal audit system
commensurate with its size and operations. If the company does that then it is
planning not to continue with N & Co. LLP as its internal auditors. Please advise.

Answer

In the given situation, if the internal audit function of the company is fine as per its
size and operations then it may decide not to continue with N & Co. LLP.

SUMMARY

 Every company shall prepare and keep at its registered office books of
       account and other relevant books and papers and financial statement for
       every financial year which give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs
       of the company, including that of its branch office or offices, if any, and
       explain the transactions effected both at the registered office and its branches

23 Vide notification GSR 08(E) dated 4th January, 2017
24 Vide notification GSR 09(E) dated 4th January, 2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.81

       and such books shall be kept on accrual basis and according to the double
       entry system of accounting.

 The financial statement shall give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of
       the company or companies, comply with the accounting standards notified
       under section 133 and shall be in the form or forms as may be provided for
       different class or classes of companies in Schedule III. Provided that the items
       contained in such financial statements shall be in accordance with the
       accounting standards.

 A company shall not re-open its books of account and not recast its financial
       statement, unless an application in this regard is made by the Central
       Government, the Income-tax authorities, the Securities and Exchange Board
       of India, any other statutory regulatory body or authority or any person
       concerned and an order is made by a court of competent jurisdiction or the
       Tribunal to the effect.

 If it appears to the directors of a company that the financial statement of the
       company; or the report of the Board, do not comply with the provisions of
       section 129 or section 134 they may prepare revised financial statement or a
       revised report in respect of any of the three preceding financial years after
       obtaining approval of the Tribunal on an application made by the company
       in such form and manner as may be prescribed and a copy of the order passed
       by the Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar.

 National Financial Reporting Authority is an independent regulator set up to
       oversee the auditing profession and to provide for the matters pertaining to
       Accounting and Auditing Standards

 The Central Government may prescribe the standards of accounting or any
       addendum thereto, as recommended by the Institute of Chartered
       Accountants of India, constituted under section 3 of the Chartered
       Accountants Act, 1949, in consultation with and after examination of the
       recommendations made by the National Financial Reporting Authority.

 The financial statement, including consolidated financial statement, if any,
       shall be approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed on behalf
       of the Board by the chairperson of the company where he is authorised by
       the Board or by two directors out of which one shall be managing director, if
       any, and the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer and the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.82  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Company Secretary of the company, wherever they are appointed, or in the
       case of One Person Company, only by one director, for submission to the
       auditor for his report thereon. The auditors' report shall be attached to every
       financial statement. A report by its Board of Directors shall be attached to
       statements laid before a company in general meeting.

 Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, or
       turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five
       crore or more during any financial year the immediately preceding financial
       year shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the
       Board consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one director
       shall be an independent director. The Board of every such company, shall
       ensure that the company spends, in every financial year, at least two percent
       of the average net profits of the company made during the three immediately
       preceding financial year, or where the company has not completed the period
       of three financial years since its incorporation, during such immediately
       preceding financial years, in pursuance of its Corporate Social Responsibility
       Policy.

 A copy of the financial statement, including consolidated financial
       statements, if any, auditor's report and every other document required by law
       to be annexed or attached to the financial statements, which are to be laid
       before a company in its general meeting, shall be sent to every member of
       the company , to every trustee for the debenture-holder of any debenture
       issued by the company, and to all persons other than such member or trustee,
       being the person so entitled, not less than twenty-one days before the date
       of the meeting.

 A copy of the financial statement, including consolidated financial statement,
       if any, along with all the documents which are required to be or attached to
       such financial statements under this Act, duly adopted at the annual general
       meeting of the company, shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days of
       the date of annual general meeting in such manner, with such fees or
       additional fees as may be prescribed.

 Every listed company; every unlisted public company (having paid up share
       capital of fifty crore rupees or more during the preceding financial year; or
       turnover of two hundred crore rupees or more during the preceding financial
       year; or Outstanding loans or borrowings from banks or public financial

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.83

       institutions exceeding one hundred crore rupees or more at any point of time
       during the preceding financial year; or Outstanding deposits of twenty five
       crore rupees or more at any point of time during the preceding financial year);
       and every private company (having turnover of two hundred crore rupees or
       more during the preceding financial year; or outstanding loans or borrowings
       from banks or public financial institutions exceeding one hundred crore
       rupees or more at any point of time during the preceding financial year) shall
       be required to appoint an internal auditor, who shall either be a chartered
       accountant or a cost accountant , or such other professional as may be
       decided by the Board to conduct internal audit of the functions and activities
       of the company.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. ABC Limited has its shares listed on a recognized stock exchange in India.
       During the current financial year ending on 31st March 2024, the Securities
       and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has found some irregularities in the filings
       made by the company. Accordingly, SEBI proposes to make an application to
       the Tribunal for reopening of the books of account of the Company. You, as an
       expert, are called upon by SEBI to advise the financial year upto which the
       application for reopening of books of account may be granted by Tribunal?

       (a) 2019-2020

       (b) 2017-2018

       (c) 2014-2015

       (d) 2015-2016

2. As per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, which of the following
       statement is correct with respect to the surplus arising out of the CSR activities:

       (a) The surplus cannot exceed five percent of total CSR expenditure of the
               company for the financial year.

       (b) The surplus shall not form part of the business profit of a company

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.84  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (c) The surplus cannot exceed 10 percent of total CSR expenditure of the
               company for the financial year.

       (d) The surplus shall form part of the business profit of a company

3. Shri Limited (a company having CSR Committee as per the provision of Section
       135 of the Companies Act, 2013) decides to spend and utilize the amount of
       Corporate Social Responsibility on the activities for the benefit of all the
       employees of Shri Limited. As per the provision of the Companies Act, 2013 this
       would mean that:

       (a) This is the total amount spent on Corporate Social Responsibility
               activities by Shri Limited for that financial year

       (b) No amount spent on Corporate Social Responsibility activities by Shri
               Limited for that financial year

       (c) Only half of the total amount spent, shall be considered to be spent on
               Corporate Social Responsibility activities by Shri Limited for that financial
               year

       (d) Only the amount that has been spent on the employees having salary of
               ` 20,000 per month or less, shall be considered be considered to be spent
               on Corporate Social Responsibility activities by Shri Limited for that
               financial year.

Descriptive Questions

1. The registered office of the Bharat Ltd. is situated in a classified backward area of
       Maharashtra. The Board wants to keep its books of account at its corporate office
       in Mumbai which is conveniently located. The Board seeks your advice about the
       feasibility of maintaining the accounting records at a place other than the
       registered office of the company. Advice.

2. The Board of Directors of Vishwakarma Electronics Limited consists of
       Mr. Ghanshyam (Director), Mr. Hyder (Director) and Mr. Indersen (Managing
       Director). The company has also employed a Company Secretary.

       The financial statements of the company were signed by Mr. Ghanshyam and
       Mr. Hyder. Examine whether the authentication of financial statements of the
       company was in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES                              9.85

3. A Housing Finance Ltd. is a housing finance company having a paid-up share
       capital of ` 11 crore and a turnover of ` 145 crore during the financial year
       2023-24. Explain with reference to the relevant provisions and rules, whether it is
       necessary for A Housing Finance Ltd. to file its financial statements in XBRL mode.

4. Herry Limited is a company registered in Thailand. SKP Limited (Registered in
       India), a wholly owned subsidiary company of Herry Limited decided to follow
       different financial year for consolidation of its accounts outside India. State the
       procedure to be followed in this regard.

5. (i) Ravi Limited maintained its books of account under Single Entry System of
               Accounting. Is it permitted under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013?

       (ii) State the persons responsible for complying with the provisions regarding
               maintenance of Books of Account of a company.

       (iii) Whether a company can keep books of Account in electronic mode
               accessible only outside India?

6. The Government of India is holding 51% of the paid-up equity share capital of
       Sun Ltd. The Audited financial statements of Sun Ltd. for the financial year
       2022-23 were placed at its annual general meeting held on 31st August 2023.
       However, pending the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
       India (CAG) on the said accounts the meeting was adjourned without adoption
       of the accounts. On receipt of CAG comments on the accounts, the adjourned
       annual general meeting was held on 15th October, 2023 whereat the accounts
       were adopted. Thereafter, Sun Ltd. filed its financial statements relevant to the
       financial year 2022-23 with the Registrar of Companies on 12th November,
       2023. Examine, with reference to the applicable provisions of the Companies
       Act, 2013, whether Sun Ltd. has complied with the statutory requirement
       regarding filing of accounts with the Registrar?

7. The Income Tax Authorities in the current financial year 2023-24 observed,
       during the assessment proceedings, a need to re-open the accounts of Chetan
       Ltd. for the financial year 2012-13 and, therefore, filed an application before
       the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) to issue the order to Chetan Ltd.
       for re-opening of its accounts and recasting the financial statements for the
       financial year 2012-13. Examine the validity of the application filed by the
       Income Tax Authorities to NCLT.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    9.86           CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.  (d) 2015-2016

2.  (b) The surplus shall not form part of the business profit of a

          company

3.  (b) No amount spent on Corporate Social Responsibility

          activities by Shri Limited for that financial year

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. According to section 128(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, every company is
       required to prepare and keep the books of accounts and other relevant books
       and papers and financial statement for every financial year which give a true
       and fair view of the state of the affairs of the company, including that of its
       branch office or offices, if any, and explain the transactions effected both at
       the registered office and its branches and such books shall be kept on accrual
       basis and according to the double entry system of accounting.

       The proviso to section 128(1) further provides that all or any of the books of
       account aforesaid and other relevant papers may be kept at such other place
       in India as the Board of Directors may decide and where such a decision is
       taken, the company shall, within seven days thereof, file with the Registrar a
       notice in writing giving the full address of that other place. Further company
       may keep such books of account or other relevant papers in electronic mode
       as per the Rule 3 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014.

       Therefore, the Board of Bharat Ltd. can keep its books of account at its
       corporate office in Mumbai by following the above-mentioned procedure.

2. According to section 134(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, the financial
       statements, including consolidated financial statement, if any, shall be
       approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed on behalf of the
       Board by the chairperson of the company where he is authorised by the Board
       or by two directors out of which one shall be managing director, if any, and
       the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer and the company
       secretary of the company, wherever they are appointed, or in the case of One

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES  9.87

       Person Company, only by one director, for submission to the auditor for his
       report thereon.

       In the instant case, the Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Account have been
       signed only by Mr. Ghanshyam and Mr. Hyder, the directors. In view of Section
       134(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, Mr. Indersen, the Managing Director
       should be one of the two signing directors. Since, the company has also
       employed a Company Secretary, he should also sign the financial statements.

3. As per Rule 3(1) of the Companies (Filing of Documents and forms in Extensible
       Business Reporting Language) Rules, 2015, following class of companies shall
       file their financial statements and other documents under section 137 of the
       Act with the Registrar in e-form AOC-4 XBRL as per Annexure-I:

       (i) Companies listed with stock exchanges in India and their Indian
               subsidiaries;

       (ii) Companies having paid up capital of five crore rupees or above;

       (iii) Companies having turnover of one hundred crore rupees or above;

       (iv) All companies which are required to prepare their financial statements
               in accordance with Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules,
               2015.

       Provided further that non-banking financial companies, housing finance
       companies and companies engaged in the business of banking and insurance
       sector are exempted from filing of financial statements under these rules.

       Hence A housing Finance Ltd., being a housing finance company, is exempted
       from filing its financial statement in XBRL mode.

4. Where a company or body corporate, which is a holding company or a
       subsidiary or associate company of a company incorporated outside India
       and is required to follow a different financial year for consolidation of its
       accounts outside India, the Central Government may, on an application made
       by that company or body corporate in such form and manner as may be
       prescribed, allow any period as its financial year, whether or not that period
       is a year. Any application pending before the Tribunal as on the date of
       commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018, shall be
       disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable to it
       before such commencement. Also, a company or body corporate, existing on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.88  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       the commencement of this Act, shall, within a period of two years from such
       commencement, align its financial year as per the provisions of this clause.
       SKP Limited is advised to follow the above procedure accordingly.

5. (i) According to Section 128(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, every company
               shall prepare "books of account" and other relevant books and papers
               and financial statement for every financial year. These books of account
               should give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the
               company, including that of its branch office(s). These books of account
               must be kept on accrual basis and according to the double entry system
               of accounting. Hence, maintenance of books of account under Singly
               Entry System of Accounting by Ravi Limited is not permitted.

       (ii) Persons responsible to maintain books: As per Section 128 (6) of the
               Companies Act, 2013, the person responsible to take all reasonable
               steps to secure compliance by the company with the requirement of
               maintenance of books of account etc. shall be:

               (a) Managing Director,

               (b) Whole-Time Director, in charge of finance

               (c) Chief Financial Officer

               (d) Any other person of a company charged by the Board with duty
                       of complying with provisions of section 128.

       (iii) A Company has the option of keeping such books of account or other
               relevant papers in electronic mode as per Rule 3 of the Companies
               (Accounts) Rules, 2014. According to such Rule,

               (a) The books of account and other relevant books and papers
                       maintained in electronic mode shall remain accessible in India so
                       as to be usable for subsequent reference.

                       Provided that for the financial year commencing on or after the
                       1st day of April, 2022, every company which uses accounting
                       software for maintaining its books of account, shall use only such
                       accounting software which has a feature of recording audit trail
                       of each and every transaction, creating an edit log of each change
                       made in books of account along with the date when such changes
                       were made and ensuring that the audit trail cannot be disabled.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES  9.89

               (b) There shall be a proper system for storage, retrieval, display or
                       printout of the electronic records as the Audit Committee, if any,
                       or the Board may deem appropriate and such records shall not be
                       disposed of or rendered unusable, unless permitted by law.

               (c) The back-up of the books of account and other books and papers
                       of the company maintained in electronic mode, including at a
                       place outside India, if any, shall be kept in servers physically
                       located in India on a periodic basis.

               Hence, a company cannot keep books of account in electronic mode
               accessible only outside India.

6. According to first proviso to section 137(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, where
       the financial statements are not adopted at annual general meeting or
       adjourned annual general meeting, such un-adopted financial statements
       along with the required documents shall be filed with the Registrar within
       thirty days of the date of annual general meeting and the Registrar shall take
       them in his records as provisional till the financial statements are filed with
       him after their adoption in the adjourned annual general meeting for that
       purpose.

       According to second proviso to section 137(1) of the Companies Act, 2013,
       financial statements adopted in the adjourned AGM shall be filed with the
       Registrar within thirty days of the date of such adjourned AGM with such fees
       or such additional fees as may be prescribed. In the instant case, the accounts
       of Sun Ltd. were adopted at the adjourned AGM held on 15th October, 2023
       and filing of financial statements with Registrar was done on 12th November,
       2023 i.e. within 30 days of the date of adjourned AGM. But Sun Ltd. has not
       filed its un-adopted financial statements within 30 days of the date of the
       annual general meeting held on 31st August 2023.

       Hence, Sun Ltd. has not complied with the statutory requirement regarding
       filing of un-adopted accounts with the Registrar, but has certainly complied
       with the provisions by filing of adopted accounts within the due date with the
       Registrar.

7. As per section 130 of the Companies Act, 2013, a company shall not re-open
       its books of account and not recast its financial statements, unless an
       application in this regard is made by the Central Government, the Income-tax

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.90  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

authorities, the Securities and Exchange Board, any other statutory body or
authority or any person concerned and an order is made by a court of
competent jurisdiction or the Tribunal to the effect that:

(i) The relevant earlier accounts were prepared in a fraudulent manner; or

(ii) The affairs of the company were mismanaged during the relevant
       period, casting a doubt on the reliability of financial statements:

However, no order shall be made in respect of re-opening of books of
account relating to a period earlier than eight financial years immediately
preceding the current financial year.

In the given instance, an application was filed for re-opening and re-casting
of the financial statements of Chetan Ltd. for the financial year 2012-2013
which is beyond 8 financial years immediately preceding the current financial
year.

Though application filed by the Income Tax Authorities to NCLT is valid, its
recommendation for reopening and recasting of financial statements for the
period earlier than eight financial years immediately preceding the current
financial year i.e. 2023-2024, is invalid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
