CHAPTER  7

MANAGEMENT AND
ADMINISTRATION

                                    LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of this Chapter, you will be able to:

 Learn about the maintenance of registers and other
      documents required to be kept by a company.

 Understand the significance and provisions relating to filing
      of Annual Return.

 Know about pre-requisites of holding meetings for
      transacting business.

 Explicate provisions governing Quorum and appointment of
      proxies.

 Identify the various modes of casting votes.
 Know about the ordinary and special resolution.
 Elucidate provisions in respect of maintenance of Minutes.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.2                                          CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

   

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

Management & Administration                Companies (Management & Administration)
     Section 88 - 122 - Companies Act, 2013                      Rules, 2014
                                                                   Registers

                                                               Annual Return
                                                      Pre-requisites of a meeting -
                                                       Quorum, Chairman, Voting

                                                                  Meetings

                                                                 Resolutions

                                                                   Minutes

     1. INTRODUCTION

 Chapter VII Consists of sections 88 to 122 as well as the Companies
                    (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014.

A company is an artificial legal entity distinct from its members. The affairs of the
company are managed by the members and directors through resolutions passed
at the validly held meetings. The day-to-day affairs of the company are managed
by the directors who collectively act through Board of Directors. The Board
performs its role within the powers granted to it. Certain powers can be exercised
by the board on its own and some with the consent of the company at the
general meetings. In the capacity as owners of the company, the shareholders
ratify the actions of the board at the general meetings. In a way, the general

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.3

meetings serve as the focal point for the shareholders to converge and give their
decisions on the actions taken by the directors.

The proceedings of the general meetings are recorded in the `minutes book'. On
yearly basis, a company is required to hold its Annual General Meeting to transact
requisite businesses including adoption of financial statements, appointment/re-
appointment of directors and auditors, etc., after the close of the financial year. In
between two AGMs, a company may hold extra-ordinary general meetings (EGM)
also if there is any need to transact certain urgent business. After the conclusion
of AGM, the company is required to prepare Annual Return and file a copy
thereof with the jurisdictional Registrar of Companies. Every company is duty-
bound to maintain register of members, register of debenture-holders and
register of other security holders.

Chapter VII of Companies Act, 2013 deals with the provisions relating to
management and administration of companies. It covers Sections 88 to 122 and is
divided under the following headings­

       Registers                                    Annual Return
Sections 88 - 91 & 95                              Sections 92 & 94

        Management and Administration

Section 88 - 122 of Act read with Companies
(Management & Administration) Rules, 2014

         Meetings                                  Requisites of Convening a
Sections 96 - 102 & 121                                        Meeting

                                                         Sections 103 - 120

To initiate, it is imperative that we streamline the understanding of this chapter so
as to link it with the essential concepts along with their procedures which can be
found in the respective rules, i.e. the Companies (Management and Administration)
Rules, 2014 as amended from time to time.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           7.4  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Chapter VII applies to all the companies, public and private, and has special
provisions applicable to One Person Company (OPC), which are enumerated in
section 122 of the Act and are discussed later in this chapter.

     2. REGISTERS

The provisions relating to maintaining the various registers as per the Companies
Act, 2013 are contained in Sections 88 ­ 91. Along with these provisions, the
Companies (Management & Administration) Rules, 2014 are also applicable to the
maintenance of registers by a company. Various provisions relating to keeping
and maintenance of registers are as follows:

Registers  Section 88 - Register of                - Register of members - Rule 3; Form MGT - 1
                 Members, etc.                     - Register of debenture-holders/any other
                                                   security-holder - Rule 4; Form MGT - 2
                  Section 89 -                     - Maintenance of Registers of members etc.-
               Declaration i.r.o.                  Rule 5
             beneficial interest in                - Index of names of members - Rule 6
                                                   - Foreign Register - Rule 7; Form MGT - 3
                    any share
                                                    Rule 9 - Forms MGT-4,
                                                         MGT- 5, MGT-6

                 Section 90 -                      Rule 10 - Procedure for
                                                    closing the register of
           Register of significant                  members, debenture-
             beneficial owners
                                                      holders and other
           Section 91 - Power to                        security holders
           close register of
           members or debenture
           holders or other
           security holders

REGISTER OF MEMBERS, ETC. [SECTION 88]

Section 88 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013 requires that every company shall
keep and maintain the following registers:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.5

(i) Register of Members (holding of each class of equity and preference shares
       of each member residing in or outside India shall be shown separately in the
       register)

(ii) Register of Debenture-holders (DH); and

(iii) Register of any other security holders (OSH).

Maintenance of Register of Members

(i) Every company limited by shares shall, from the date of its registration,
       maintain a register of its members in Form No. MGT-1. [Rule 3 (1)]

       However, in case of a company existing on the commencement of the
       Companies Act, 2013, the particulars as available in the register of members
       maintained under the Companies Act, 1956 shall be transferred to the new
       register of members in Form No. MGT-1. In case additional information,
       required as per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 and the Rules
       made thereunder, is provided by the members, such information may also
       be added in the register as and when provided. [Proviso to Rule 3 (1)]

(ii) In case of a company not having share capital, the register shall contain the
       following particulars, in respect of each member­

        Name of the member, address (registered office address in case the
               member is a body corporate); email address; Permanent Account
               Number or Corporate Identity Number (`CIN'); Nationality; in case
               member is a minor ­ name of his guardian and the date of birth of the
               member, name and address of the nominee;

        Date of becoming the member;
        Date of cessation;
        Amount of guarantee, if any;
        Any other interest, if any; and
        Instructions, if any, given by the member with regard to sending of

               notices, etc. [Rule 3 (2)]
       However, in case of a company existing on the commencement of the
        Companies Act, 2013, the particulars as available in the register of members
        maintained under the Companies Act, 1956 shall be transferred to the new
        register of members in Form No. MGT-1. In case additional information,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

required as per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 and the Rules
made thereunder, is provided by the members, such information may also
be added in the register as and when provided. [Proviso to Rule 3 (2)]

Maintenance of Register of Debenture Holders (DH) or any Other
Security Holders

Every company which issues or allots debentures or any other security shall
maintain a separate register for debenture holders or security holders, as
the case may be, for each type of debentures or other securities in Form
MGT-2. [Rule 4]

Other Requirements applicable to all the Registers

Rule 5 contains certain requirements which are applicable to all types of
registers (i.e. Register of Members, Register of Debenture-holders and
Register of any Other Security Holders). These are stated as under:

 Time period for making entries in Register

       As per Rule 5 (1), entries have to be made in the Register within 7 days
       of the date of approval by the Board or Committee thereof by
       approving the allotment or transfer of shares, debentures or any other
       securities, as the case may be.

       According to Rule 5 (3), consequent upon any forfeiture, buy-back,
       reduction, sub-division, consolidation or cancellation of shares, issue of
       sweat equity shares, transmission of shares, shares issued under any
       scheme of arrangements, mergers, reconstitution or employees stock
       option scheme or any of such scheme provided under this Act or by
       issue of duplicate or new share certificates or new debenture or other
       security certificates, entry shall be made within seven days after
       approval by the Board or committee, in the register of members or in
       the respective registers, as the case may be.

 Place of maintaining Register

       According to Rule 5 (2), the registers shall be maintained at the
       registered office of the company unless a special resolution is passed in
       a general meeting authorising the keeping of the register at any other
       place within the city, town or village in which the registered office is

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.7

       situated or any other place in India in which more than 1/10th of the
       total members entered in the register of members reside.

 Other information also to be referred in register

        In terms of Rule 5 (6), if any order is passed by any judicial or
               revenue authority or by Security and Exchange Board of India
               (SEBI) or competent authority attaching the shares, debentures
               or other securities and giving directions for remittance of
               dividend or interest, the necessary reference of such order shall
               be indicated in the respective register.

        According to Rule 5 (7), in case of companies whose securities
               are listed on a stock exchange in or outside India, the particulars
               of any pledge, charge, lien or hypothecation created by the
               promoters in respect of any securities of the company held by
               the promoter including the names of pledgee/pawnee and any
               revocation therein shall be entered in the register within fifteen
               days from such an event.

        According to Rule 5 (8), if promoters of any listed company,
               which has formed a joint venture company with another
               company have pledged or hypothecated or created charge or
               lien in respect of any security of the listed company in
               connection with such joint venture company, the particulars of
               such pledge, hypothecation, charge and lien shall be entered in
               the register members of the listed company within fifteen days
               from such an event.

 Updating of change in status of members

       Rule 5 (4) states that if any change occurs in the status of a member or
       debenture-holder or any other security holder:

       - whether due to death or insolvency or change of name or due to
               transfer to Investor Education Protection Fund (IEPF) or due to
               any other reason,

       entries thereof explaining the change shall be made in the respective
       registers.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

        Rectification in register

               According to Rule 5 (5), if any rectification is made in the register
               maintained under section 88 by the company pursuant to any order
               passed by the competent authority under the Act, the necessary
               reference of such order shall be indicated in the respective register.

Index of names

Section 88 (2) provides that every register maintained under section 88 (1) shall
include an index of names included therein. However, according to Rule 6 of the
Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014, the maintenance of
index is not necessary where the number of members is less than 50. Rule 6 also
provides that the company shall make the necessary entries in the index
simultaneously with the entry for allotment or transfer of any security in such
Register.

Register and Index of Beneficial Owners being maintained by a Depository

Section 88 (3) is an enabling provision, which sets out that the register and index
of beneficial owners maintained by a depository under section 11 of the
Depositories Act, 1996, shall be deemed to be the corresponding register and
index for the purposes of this Act.

Foreign Register [Section 88(4) read with rule 7]

 Maintenance of Foreign Register:

       A company which has share capital or which has issued
       debentures or any other security may, if so authorised by its
       articles, keep in any country outside India, a part of the register of members
       or debenture holders or of any other security holders or of beneficial
       owners, resident in that country. The register shall be called "Foreign
       Register".

 Other requirements relating to Foreign Register:

       In case a company decides to keep a Foreign Register, it shall comply with
       the following requirements:

       (i) Filing of notice of the situation of the office: Within 30 days from the
               date of the opening of any Foreign Register, the company shall file

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.9

       with the Registrar of Companies, notice of the situation of the office
       where such register is kept. The notice shall be filed in Form No. MGT­
       3 along with the requisite fee.

(ii) Filing of notice in case of change or discontinuance: In the event of any
       change in the situation of such office or of its discontinuance, the
       company shall, within 30 days from the date of such change or
       discontinuance, as the case may be, file notice in Form No. MGT-3 with
       the Registrar of Companies, of such change or discontinuance.

(iii) Foreign Register part of company's register: A foreign register shall be
       deemed to be part of the company's register (to be called `principal
       register') of members or of debenture-holders or of any other security
       holders or beneficial owners, as the case may be.

(iv) Format of Foreign Register: The foreign register shall be maintained in
       the same format as the principal register.

(v) Inspection, etc. of Foreign Register: A foreign register shall be open to
       inspection and may be closed, and extracts may be taken therefrom
       and copies thereof may be required, in the same manner, as is
       applicable to the principal register. However, advertisement before
       closing the register shall be inserted in at least two newspapers
       circulating in the place wherein the foreign register is kept.

(vi) Decision of the appropriate competent authority binding in regard to the
       rectification: If a foreign register is kept by a company in any country
       outside India, the decision of the appropriate competent authority in
       regard to the rectification of the register shall be binding.

(vii) Making of Entries in Foreign Register: Entries in the foreign register shall
       be made after the Board of Directors or its duly constituted committee
       approves the allotment or transfer of shares, debentures or any other
       securities, as the case may be.

(viii) Transmission of a copy every entry: The company shall transmit to its
       registered office in India, a copy of every entry in any foreign register
       within 15 days after the entry is made.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ix) Keeping of Duplicate Foreign Register at Registered Office: The company
               shall keep at the Registered Office a duplicate register of every foreign
               register duly updated from time to time.

       (x) Duplicate Foreign Register to be part of Principal Register: Every
               duplicate foreign register shall be deemed to be the part of the
               principal register, for all purposes of the Companies Act.

       (xi) Transactions not to be registered in any other Register: No transaction
               with respect to any shares or as the case may be, debentures or any
               other security, registered in a foreign register shall, during the
               continuance of that registration, be registered in any other register.

       (xii) Transfer of Entries on discontinuation: The company may discontinue
               the keeping of any foreign register and thereupon all entries in that
               register shall be transferred to some other foreign register kept by the
               company outside India or to the principal register.

Penalty for failure to maintain register in accordance with the provisions of
Section 88(1) and 88(2)

If a company does not maintain a register of members or debenture-holders or
other security holders or fails to maintain them in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the company shall be liable to a penalty of
three lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees.

Nature of offence

The offence under this section is a compoundable offence under section 441 of
the Act.

Details of Nominations in the register

It is important to note that Form MGT ­ 1 and MGT ­ 2 require details of
nomination as referred to in section 72 of the Act, read with Rule 19 of the
Companies (Share Capital and Debentures) Rules, 2014 to be entered in the
register of members and register of debenture-holders or other security holders
as the case may be.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.11

Authentication of entries [Rule 8]

 The entries in the registers maintained under section 88 and index included
       therein shall be authenticated by the company secretary of the company or
       by any other person authorised by the Board for the purpose, and the date
       of the board resolution authorising the same shall be mentioned.

 The entries in the foreign register shall be authenticated by the company
       secretary of the company or person authorised by the Board by appending
       his signature to each entry.

Illustration 1

Luxy Hairstyles Private Limited allotted 500 shares in the name of Mr. Zoey's
daughter, Mila, who is 4 years old. Mr. Joe, the Director of the company, has
approached you to advise him on the entries to be made in the register of members,
since Mila is incompetent to contract in her capacity as minor.

Answer: Since minors are not competent to enter into any contract, their names
cannot be entered in the register of members without the details of guardians.
Therefore, Mr. Joe is advised that while filling MGT ­ 1, the name of a minor shall
be entered only if the details of the guardian are available. Thus, Zoey's name
shall also appear in the register of members of Luxy Hairstyles Private Limited
since Mila is a minor.

Illustration 2

Tanya and Tarun who recently got married were jointly allotted 1000 shares by
New Hospitality Services Private Limited. Tarun intimated the company that only
the name of his wife should appear in the records of the company in respect of joint
holding of shares allotted to them. The directors of the company are not sure
whether this is possible, given that the shares are held in the names of both Tanya
and Tarun.

Answer: Joint holders of shares may request the company to enter their names in
the register in a certain order, or execute transfers to have their holdings split,
with the result that part of the holding is entered showing the name of one
holder and part showing the name of other holder. However, the condition of
Tarun that only the name of his wife, Tanya, should appear in the register as a
member cannot be acceded to, although the names can be entered in the order
such that the name of his wife appears first. The reason for this is that the articles

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.12                    CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

of most companies provide that, in the case of exclusion of the other joint
holders, and for this purpose, seniority shall be determined by the order in which
the names stand in the register of members.

DECLARATION IN RESPECT OF BENEFICIAL INTEREST IN ANY SHARE
[SECTION 89]

Section 89 of the Companies Act, 2013 contains provisions relating to declaration
of beneficial interest in any share. Rule 9 of the Companies (Management and
Administration) Rules, 2014 provides for procedural aspect.

Member not holding      Any Person holding         Any changes in the
beneficial interest in  beneficial interest in     beneficial interest
                                                   of persons making
    the shares of a      the shares of that
 company [Section        company [Section              declarations
                                                      [Section 89(3)]
         89(1)]                  89(2)]

                              shall file a
                            declaration of
                         beneficial interest
                           within 30 days

                                  and
                        company shall also

                          file a return with
                           ROC in 30 days

 Declaration by registered holder of shares: A person whose name is
       entered in the register of members of a company as the holder of shares in
       that company but who does not hold the beneficial interest in such shares
       (hereinafter referred to as "the registered owner"), shall file with the
       company, a declaration to that effect in Form No. MGT-4, specifying the
       name and other particulars of the person who holds the beneficial interest in
       such shares. The declaration MGT-4 shall be made within a period of thirty
       days from the date on which his name is entered in the register of members
       of such company. [Section 89 (1) and Rule 9 (1)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.13

 Declaration by person holding beneficial interest in shares: Every person
       who holds or acquires a beneficial interest in share of a company shall make
       a declaration to the company in form MGT-5, within 30 days after acquiring
       such beneficial interest, specifying the nature of his interest, particulars of
       the person in whose name the shares stand registered in the books of the
       company and such other particulars as may be prescribed. [Section 89 (2)
       and Rule 9 (2)]

 Declaration in case of change in beneficial interest: Where any change
       occurs in the beneficial interest in any shares in respect of which a
       declaration has been filed under section 89 (1) by the registered owner and
       under section 89 (2) by the beneficial owner then, within 30 days of such
       change, a declaration is to be made to the company.

 Filing of return by the company with the Registrar: Where any
       declaration under section 89 is made to a company, the company shall make
       a note of such declaration in the register concerned and shall file, within
       thirty days from the date of receipt of declaration by it, a return in Form No.
       MGT-6 with the Registrar in respect of such declaration with fee. [Section 89
       (6) and Rule 9 (3)]

 Every company shall designate a person who shall be responsible for
       furnishing, and extending co-operation for providing, information to the
       Registrar or any other authorised officer with respect to beneficial interest in
       shares of the company. [Rule 9 (4)]

 For the purpose of sub-rule(4), the company may designate-

       (i) a company secretary, if there is a requirement of appointment of such
               company secretary under the Act and the rules made thereunder; or

       (ii) a key managerial personnel, other than the company secretary; or

       (iii) every director, if there is no company secretary or key managerial
               personnel. [Rule 9 (5)]

 Until a person is designated as referred under sub-rule (4), the following
       persons shall be deemed to have been designated person;

       (i) company secretary, if there is a requirement of appointment of such
               company secretary under the Act and the rules made thereunder; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ii) every Managing Director or Manager, in case a company secretary has
               not been appointed; or

       (iii) every director, if there is no company secretary or a Managing
               Director or Manager. [Rule 9 (6)]

 Every company shall inform the details of the designated person in Annual
       return. [Rule 9 (7)]

 If the company changes the designated person at any time, it shall intimate
       the same to the Registrar in e-form GNL-2 specified under the Companies
       (Registration Offices and Fees) Rules, 2014. [Rule 9 (8)]

 Consequence of non-filing of declaration: Where a declaration required to
       be made under section 89 is not made by the beneficial owner, then, any
       right with respect to such shares shall not be enforceable by the beneficial
       owner or by any person claiming through him. [Section 89 (8)]

 Exemption: Rule 9 shall not apply to a trust which is created to set up a
       Mutual Fund or Venture Capital Fund or such other fund as may be approved
       by SEBI. Accordingly, such entities need not file the declarations as
       envisaged by this rule.

 Duty of the Company to pay dividend not affected: Nothing contained in
       this section shall be deemed to prejudice the obligation of a company to pay
       dividend to its members under this Act and the said obligation shall, on such
       payment, stand discharged.

 Meaning of beneficial interest: For the purposes of section 89 and section
       90, beneficial interest in a share includes, directly or indirectly, through any
       contract, arrangement or otherwise, the right or entitlement of a person
       alone or together with any other person to:

       (i) exercise or cause to be exercised any or all of the rights attached to
               such share; or

       (ii) receive or participate in any dividend or other distribution in respect
               of such share. [Section 89(10)]

Exemption from the provisions of section 89 [Section 89(11)]

The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class or classes of
persons from complying with any of the requirements of this section, except sub-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.15

section (10), if it is considered necessary to grant such exemption in the public
interest and any such exemption may be granted either unconditionally or subject
to such conditions as may be specified in the notification.

Exemption to a Government Company- In case of Government Company -
Section 89 shall not apply. [Notification No. GSR 463 (E), dated 5th June, 2015]

The above-mentioned exemption shall be applicable to a government company
which has not committed a default in filing its financial statements under section
137 or annual return under section 92 with the Registrar- [Notification No. GSR
582 (E), dated 13th June, 2017].

Penalty for default [Sections 89 (5) & 89 (7)]

Two kinds of penal provisions as described below are included under section 89 ­

(i) Relating to Default made by persons required to make a declaration - If
any person fails to make a declaration as required under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3), he shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand
rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of two hundred
rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to
a maximum of five lakh rupees. [Section 89(5)]

(ii) Relating to Default made by a company - If a company, required to file a
return under sub-section (6), fails to do so before the expiry of the time specified
therein, the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
liable to a penalty of one thousand rupees for each day during which such failure
continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees in the case of a company and
two lakh rupees in case of an officer who is in default. [Section 89(7)]

REGISTER OF SIGNIFICANT BENEFICIAL OWNERS IN A COMPANY
[SECTION 90]

As per Section 90 of the Companies Act, 2013, every Significant Beneficial Owner
(SBO) is required to disclose the nature of his interest and other particulars within
the prescribed period of time to the Company, which in turn will inform the same
to the Registrar of Companies. In this connection, MCA has issued the Companies
(Significant Beneficial Owners) Rules, 2018, which deal with identification and
reporting in connection with SBO.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.16  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Definition of Significant Beneficial Owner: Section 90(1) provides that every
individual, who acting alone or together, or through one or more persons or trust,
including a trust and persons resident outside India, holds beneficial interests, of
not less than twenty-five per cent. or such other percentage as may be
prescribed, in shares of a company or the right to exercise, or the actual
exercising of significant influence or control as defined in clause (27) of section 2,
over the company (herein referred to as "significant beneficial owner"), shall make
a declaration to the company, specifying the nature of his interest and other
particulars, in such manner and within such period of acquisition of the beneficial
interest of rights and any change thereof, as may be prescribed.

In terms of Rule 2(1)(h) of the Companies (Significant Beneficial Owners) Rules,
2018, the term `Significant Beneficial Owner' (SBO) in relation to a reporting entity
means and individuals referred to in section 90(1), who:

i. acting alone or together, or

ii. through one or more persons or trust, possess one or more of the following
       rights or entitlements in the Reporting Company (i.e. the company in
       respect of which SBO declaration is required to be filed):

       (i) holds indirectly, or together with any direct holdings, not less than
               10% of the shares;

       (ii) holds indirectly, or together with any direct holdings, not less than
               10% of the voting rights in the shares;

       (iii) has the right to receive or participate in not less than 10% of the total
               distributable dividend, or any other distribution, in a financial year
               through indirect holdings alone, or together with any direct holdings;

       (iv) has the right to exercise, or actually exercises, significant influence or
               control, in any manner other than through direct holdings alone.

In simple terms, SBO is an individual who either alone or together with other
individuals or trust, exercises rights or entitlements in the Reporting Company by
way of holding 10% shares or 10% voting rights or right to receive 10% or more
dividend, both indirect and direct holdings or right taken together or such
individual exercises significant influence or control, indirectly or along with direct
holding in the Reporting Company. The amended Rules further explain that if an

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.17

individual does not hold any indirect right or entitlement as mentioned in (i), (ii)
or (iii) above, he will not be considered to be a 'significant beneficial owner'.

Significant influence: The term "significant influence" was previously not defined
specifically for the rules, and hence, to provide clarity, the following definition has
been inserted through SBO rules: "Significant influence" means the power to
participate, directly or indirectly, in the financial and operating policy decisions of
the reporting company but is not control or joint control of those policies. [Rule 2
(1) (i)]

Majority stake: The Amendment Rules inserted a new term, "Majority Stake,"
which means:

(i) holding more than one-half of the equity share capital in the body
       corporate; or

(ii) holding more than one-half of the voting rights in the body corporate; or

(iii) having the right to receive or participate in more than one-half of the
       distributable dividend or any other distribution by the body corporate. [Rule
       2 (1) (d)]

Direct and Indirect shareholding: The Amendment Rules provide that when an
individual holds any rights or entitlement directly in the reporting company, the
said individual shall not be considered as SBO. An individual will be considered to
hold a right or entitlement directly in the Reporting Company, if he satisfies any
of the following criteria:

a. the shares in the Reporting Company representing such right or entitlement
       are held in the name of such individual;

b. the individual holds or acquires a beneficial interest in the shares of the
       Reporting Company under section 89 (2), and has made a declaration in this
       regard to the Reporting Company.

Indirect shareholding is, when a shareholder is a (a) body corporate; (b) Hindu
Undivided Family; (c) Partnership entity; (d) Trust; (e) Pooled investment vehicle.

Onus on the reporting company to identify a SBO and cause him to make
declaration: The duty is on the reporting company to identify a SBO and cause
such SBO to make a declaration in the prescribed Form.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

As per sub-section (5) of section 90 read with the Amendment Rules, every
reporting company shall give notice in the Form BEN-4 to any person (whether or
not a member of the company) whom the company knows or has reasonable
cause to believe:

(a) to be a significant beneficial owner of the company;

(b) to be having knowledge of the identity of a significant beneficial owner or
       another person likely to have such knowledge; or

(c) to have been a significant beneficial owner of the company at any time
       during the three years immediately preceding the date on which the notice
       is issued,

and who is not registered as a significant beneficial owner with the company as
required under this section.

Maintenance of Register of SBO and Inspection thereof: According to section
90 (2) and 90 (3) read with Rule 5, every company shall maintain a register of
significant beneficial owners in Form No. BEN-3 which shall be open for
inspection during business hours, at such reasonable time of not less than two
hours, on every working day as the board may decide, by any member of the
company on payment of such fee as may be specified by the company but not
exceeding fifty rupees for each inspection.

Application to the Tribunal [Section 90 (7)]: The company shall,:

(a) Where that person fails to give the company, the information required by
       the notice within the time specified therein. (According to Rule 7 notice
       shall be given in Form No. BEN-4 for providing information within 30 days
       of date of notice); or

(b) Where the information given is not satisfactory,

apply to the Tribunal within a period of fifteen days of the expiry of the period
specified in the notice, for an order directing that the shares in question be
subject to restrictions with regard to transfer of interest, suspension of all rights
attached to the shares and such other matters as may be prescribed.

Note: According to Rule 7, the reporting company shall apply to the Tribunal in
accordance with section 90 (7), for order directing that the shares in question be
subject to restrictions including:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.19

(i) restrictions on the transfer of interest attached to the shares in question;

(ii) suspension of the right to receive dividend or any other distribution in
       relation to the shares in question;

(iii) suspension of voting rights in relation to the shares in question;

(iv) any other restriction on all or any of the rights attached with the shares in
       question.

Section 90 (8) states that on any application made under sub-section (7), the
Tribunal may, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the parties concerned,
make such order restricting the rights attached with the shares within a period of
sixty days of receipt of application or such other period as may be prescribed.

According to section 90 (9), the company or the person aggrieved by the order of
the Tribunal may make an application to the Tribunal for relaxation or lifting of
the restrictions placed under section 90 (8) within a period of one year from the
date of such order.

Provided that if no such application has been filed within a period of one year
from the date of the order such shares shall be transferred, without any
restrictions, to the authority constituted under sub-section (5) of section 125 (i.e.
Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority), in such manner as may be
prescribed.

Declaration by SBO under Section 90

As regards declaration of significant beneficial ownership under section 90, Rule 3
of SBO Rules, 2018 states as under:

(1) Every individual who is a significant beneficial owner (SBO) in a Reporting
       Company, as on the date of commencement of the Amendment Rules, 2019
       (i.e. 8-2-2019), is required to file a declaration in Form No. BEN-1 with the
       Reporting Company within 90 days from such commencement.

       Note: According to Rule 4, the Reporting Company shall be required to file a
       return in Form No. BEN-2 with the Registrar in respect of such declaration
       within 30 days of its receipt from the SBO.

(2) Any individual, who subsequently becomes a significant beneficial owner
       (SBO) in the Reporting Company or whose significant beneficial ownership
       undergoes any change, shall be required to file a declaration in Form No.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.20  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       BEN-1 with the Reporting Company in within 30 days of such acquisition or
       change.

       Explanation: If an individual becomes a significant beneficial owner in the
       Reporting Company or if his significant beneficial ownership undergoes any
       change within ninety days of the commencement of the Companies
       (Significant Beneficial Owners) Amendment Rules, 2019 (i.e. 8-2-2019), it
       shall be deemed that such individual became the significant beneficial
       owner or any change therein happened on the date of expiry of ninety days
       from the date of commencement of said rules, and the period of thirty days
       for filing will be reckoned accordingly.

Non-Applicability of SBO Rules

Rule 8 of The Companies (Significant Beneficial Owner) Amendment Rules, 2018
states that the `SBO' Rules shall not be made applicable to the extent the share of
the Reporting Company is held by:

(a) the Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority [constituted under
       section 125 (5)];

(b) its holding reporting company provided that the details of such holding
       reporting company shall be reported in Form No. BEN-2;

(c) the Central Government, State Government or any local authority;

(d) (i) a reporting company or (ii) a body corporate or (iii) an entity, controlled
       wholly or partly by the Central Government and/ or State Government(s);

(e) investment vehicles such as mutual funds, alternative investment funds
       (AIFs), Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) and Infrastructure Investment
       Trusts (InVITs) registered with and regulated by the Securities and Exchange
       Board of India; and

(f) investment vehicles regulated by Reserve Bank of India, Insurance
       Regulatory and Development Authority of India or Pension Fund Regulatory
       and Development Authority.

Penalty for Contravention

(a) By SBO: If any person fails to make a declaration as required under sub-
       section (1), he shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and in
       case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one thousand rupees for

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.21

       each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a
       maximum of two lakh rupees. [Section 90(10)]

(b) By Reporting Company: If a company, required to maintain register under
       sub-section (2) and file the information under sub-section (4) or required to
       take necessary steps under sub-section (4A), fails to do so or denies
       inspection as provided therein, the company shall be liable to a penalty of
       one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of
       five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such failure
       continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and every officer of the
       company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five
       thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of
       two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such failure
       continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees. [Section 90(11)]

It is worth noting that any contravention by Company and Officer in Default of
the provisions of Section 90 and SBO Rules is compoundable.

Note: Where any person wilfully furnishes any false or incorrect information or
suppresses any material information of which he is aware in the declaration made,
he shall be liable for punishment for fraud under section 447. [Section 90(12)]

Exemption to a Government Company- In case of Government Company -
Section 90 shall not apply - Notification No. GSR 463 (E), dated 5th June, 2015.

The above-mentioned exemption shall be applicable to a government company
which has not committed a default in filing its financial statements under section
137 or annual return under section 92 with the Registrar- Notification No. GSR
582 (E), dated 13th June, 2017.

POWER TO CLOSE REGISTER OF MEMBERS OR DEBENTURE-HOLDERS OR
OTHER SECURITY HOLDERS [SECTION 91]

Section 91 (1) deals with the time limits for which the respective registers of
members, debenture-holders and other security holders are allowed to be closed.
Section 91 (2) mentions the penalty for contravention of the provisions of sub-
section (1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          7.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Sec 91 (1)       · Time Limits for Closure of
                   Registers

Sec 91 (2)      · Penalty Provisions

Section 91 (1) contains following provisions:

(i) Closure Period: A company may close its register of members or register of
       debenture-holders or register of other security holders for an aggregate
       period of 45 days in each year but not exceeding 30 days at any one time.

(ii) Notice Period: The respective registers of members, debenture-holders or
       other security holders may be closed by giving minimum 7 days' notice or
       such lesser period as may be specified by Securities Exchange Board of India
       (`SEBI') for listed companies or those companies which intend to get their
       securities listed.

Rule 10 of the Companies (Management & Administration) Rules, 2014, specifies
the manner of closure of registers as under:

(a) A company closing the register of members or the register of debenture
       holders or the register of other security holders shall give at least seven
       days previous notice and in such manner, as may be specified by SEBI, if
       such company is a listed company or intends to get its securities listed,

        by advertisement at least once in a vernacular newspaper in the
               principal vernacular language of the district and having a wide
               circulation in the place where the registered office of the company is
               situated, and

        at least once in English language in an English newspaper circulating in
               that district and having wide circulation in the place where the
               registered office of the company is situated, and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.23

        publish the notice on the website as may be notified by the Central
               Government and on the website, if any, of the Company. [Rule 10 (1)]

(b) Exemption to Private Companies: It is to be noted that a private company
       has been exempted from issuing a public notice in newspapers, provided it
       issues minimum 7 days' notice to its members prior to closure of the
       registers. [Rule 10 (2)]

Section 91 (2) contains penalty provisions as stated below:

In case of contravention of provisions of section 91(1) (i.e. if the respective
registers are closed without giving notice, or after giving a shorter notice than
that so provided, or for a continuous or an aggregate period in excess of the
specified limits), section 91 (2) states following penalty:

 the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
       liable to a penalty of ` 5,000 per day subject to a maximum of ` 1,00,000
       during which the register is kept closed.

Note: The offence is a compoundable offence under section 441 of the
Companies Act, 2013.

     3. ANNUAL RETURN [SECTION 92 AND 94]

Provisions with regard to Annual Return are contained in section 92 of the
Companies Act, 2013 and Rules 11 and 12 of the Companies (Management &
Administration) Rules, 2014.

As per Rule 11, every company shall file its annual return in Form No. MGT-7
except One Person Company (OPC) and Small Company.

One Person Company and Small Company shall file the annual return from the
financial year 2020-2021 onwards in Form No. MGT-7A.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    7.24       CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

  Penalty for     Contents of
contravention   Annual Return;

                Form No. MGT
                         7;

                Form No. MGT
               7A (for OPC and
               small company)

                                                     Signing of
                                                   Annual Return

                                 Annual Return     Certification by
                                (Section 92 and       Company
                                 Rules 11 & 12)      Secretary in
                                                      Practice, if
Filing of Annual                                       required
Return with RoC

                                 Placement on
                                     website

Contents of Annual Return

According to section 92(1), every company shall prepare a return (referred to as
the Annual Return) in the prescribed form containing the particulars as they stood
on the close of the financial year regarding--

(a) its registered office, principal business activities, particulars of its holding,
       subsidiary and associate companies;

(b) its shares, debentures and other securities and shareholding pattern;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.25

1(c) [Omitted]

(d) its members and debenture-holders along with changes therein since the
       close of the previous financial year;

(e) its promoters, directors, key managerial personnel along with changes
       therein since the close of the previous financial year;

(f) meetings of members or a class thereof, Board and its various committees
       along with attendance details;

2(g) remuneration of directors and key managerial personnel;

(h) penalty or punishment imposed on the company, its directors or officers
       and details of compounding of offences and appeals made against such
       penalty or punishment;

(i) matters relating to certification of compliances, disclosures as may be
       prescribed;

(j) details, as may be prescribed, in respect of shares held by or on behalf of
       the Foreign Institutional Investors; and

(k) such other matters as may be prescribed.

Abridged Form of Annual Return

In terms of Second Proviso to Section 91 (1), the Central Government may
prescribe abridged form of annual return for One Person Company, small
company and such other class or classes of companies as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, as per Rule 11 (1) One Person Company and small company shall file
the annual return from the financial year 2020-2021 onwards in Form No.
MGT-7A.

1 Clause (c) of section 92(1) was omitted vide the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017,
w.e.f. 5th March, 2021.
2 In case of Private Company ­ Clause (g) of sub-section (1) of Section 92 shall apply to
private companies which are small companies, as under:-
(g) "aggregate amount of remuneration drawn by directors;". - Notification No. GSR 464
(E), dated 5-6-2015, as amended by Notification No. GSR 583 (E), dated 13th June, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.26  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Signing of Annual Return

The annual return shall be signed by a director of the company and the company
secretary; and in case, there is no company secretary, by a company secretary in
practice.
However, in relation to 3One Person Company and small company, the annual return
shall be signed by the company secretary, or where there is no company secretary, by
the director of the company.

Certification of Annual Return by a Company Secretary in practice in certain
cases

Section 92 (2) read with Rule 11 (2) of the Companies (Management &
Administration) Rules, 2014, provides that the annual return, filed by:

(i) a listed company or

(ii) a company having paid-up share capital of ` 10 crore or more or a turnover
       of ` 50 crore or more, shall be certified by a Company Secretary in practice
       stating that the annual return discloses the facts correctly and adequately
       and that the company has complied with all the provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013.

Such certificate shall be in Form No. MGT ­ 8.

3In case of Private Company - For proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 92, the
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:-

"Provided that in relation to One Person Company, small company and private company
(if such private company is a start-up), the annual return shall be signed by the company
secretary, or where there is no company secretary, by the director of the company.".

The above exceptions/ modifications/ adaptations shall be applicable to a private
company which has not committed a default in filing its financial statements under
section 137 or annual return under section 92 with Registrar. [Notification No. GSR 464
(E), dated 5-6-2015, as amended by Notification No. GSR 583 (E), dated 13th June,
2017.Notification Dated 13th June, 2017]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.27

Placing of Annual Return on Website

4Every company shall place a copy of the annual return on its website, if any, and
the web-link of such annual return shall be disclosed in the Board's report. [refer
Section 92 (3)]

Time limit for Filing of Annual Return

A copy of annual return shall be filed with the RoC within 60 days from the date
on which the Annual General Meeting (`AGM') is held. Where no annual general
meeting is held in any year, it shall be filed within 60 days from the date on which
the annual general meeting should have been held, along with the reasons for not
holding the AGM. [Section 92 (4) and Rule 12]

Penalty for contravention

(i) Section 92(5) specifies as under:

       if any company fails to file its annual return under sub-section (4), before
       the expiry of the period specified therein, such company and its every
       officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees
       and in case of continuing failure, with further penalty of one hundred
       rupees for each day during which such failure continues, subject to a
       maximum of two lakh rupees in case of a company and fifty thousand
       rupees in case of an officer who is in default.

(ii) Section 92(6) specifies penalty in case of a Company Secretary in Practice as
       under:

       If a company secretary in practice certifies the annual return otherwise than
       in accordance with section 92 or the rules made thereunder, he shall be
       liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees.

Illustration 3
Big Fox Entertainment Limited called its Annual General Meeting on 30th
September, 2024, for laying down the financial statements relating to the Financial
Year ended 31st March 2024 for approval of its shareholders and conducting of
other requisite businesses. However, due to want of quorum, the meeting could not

4 (i) In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Sub-section (3) of section 92 shall not
apply. - Notification No. GSR 8 (E), dated 4th January, 2017.
(ii) In case of Specified IFSC Private Company - Sub-section (3) of section 92 shall not
apply. - Notification GSR 9 (E), dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.28                   CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

take place and was cancelled. The company did not file the annual return for the
year ending 31st March 2024, with the jurisdictional Registrar of Companies till
date. The directors are of the view that since the Annual General Meeting did not
take place, the period of 60 days for filing of annual return is not applicable and
thus, there is no contravention of section 92.

Answer: The contention of directors is incorrect if they are of the view that there
is no contravention of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. Section 92(4)
states that every company has to file an annual return with the RoC within 60
days from the date on which Annual General Meeting is held or where no Annual
General Meeting is held in any year, it shall be filed within 60 days from the date
on which the Annual General Meeting should have been held, along with the
reasons for not holding the AGM.

In the above case, the Annual General Meeting should have been held by 30th
September, 2024 but it did not take place for want of quorum. Even if it was not
held, Big Fox Entertainment Limited was required to file Annual Return within the
specified time along with the reasons for not holding the AGM. By not filing
Annual Return, the company has contravened the provisions of Section 92 of the
Companies Act, 2013 and therefore, it shall be liable for a penalty as specified in
Section 92 (5) of the Act.

PLACE OF KEEPING AND INSPECTION OF REGISTERS, RETURNS, ETC.
[SECTION 94]5

  Place of keeping                          Registered Office
registers and returns
                         Can also be kept at a place in India (other than
                       registered office) where more than 1/10th of total
                       members reside, if approved by passing a Special

                                                 Resolution

Place of keeping Registers and Returns

In respect of place of keeping Registers and Returns Section 94 (1) and First
Proviso state as under:

5 Section 93 was omitted by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017 w.e.f. 13-6-2018.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.29

(i) At Registered office: The registers required to be kept and maintained by a
company under section 88 and copies of the annual return filed under section
92 shall be kept at the registered office of the company.

(ii) At any other place in India: The registers or copies of return may also be kept
at any other place in India in which more than one-tenth of the total number of
members entered in the register of members reside, if approved by a special
resolution passed at a general meeting of the company.

Inspection of Registers, etc.

According to section 94 (2), the registers and their indices, except when they are
closed and the copies of all the returns shall be open for inspection by any
member, debenture holder, other security holder or beneficial owner, during
business hours without payment of any fees and by any other person on payment
of such fees as may be prescribed.

As per Rule 14 (1), the registers and indices maintained pursuant to section 88 and
copies of returns prepared pursuant to section 92, shall be open for inspection
during business hours, at such reasonable time on every working day as the Board
may decide, by any member, debenture holder, other security holder or beneficial
owner without payment of fee and by any other person on payment of such fee as
may be specified in the Articles of Association of the company but not exceeding fifty
rupees for each inspection.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-rule, reasonable time of not less than
two hours on every working day shall be considered by the company.

Extracts of register or index: According to Section 94 (3) read with Rule 14 (2), any
member, debenture-holder or security holder or beneficial owner or any other
person can take the extracts without payment of any fee or can also get copies
thereof with payment of fee not exceeding ` 10 for each page. Such copies or
entries or return shall be supplied within 7 days of deposit of fee.

Provided that such particulars of the register or index or return as may be
prescribed shall not be available for inspection under sub-section (2) or for taking
extracts or copies under this sub-section.

As per Rule 14, Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1) and (2), the
following particulars of the register or index or return in respect of the members

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

of a company shall not be made available for any inspection under sub-section (2)
or for taking extracts or copies under sub-section (3) of section 94, namely:

(i) address or registered address (in case of a body corporate);

(ii) e-mail ID

(iii) Unique Identification Number

(iv) PAN Number

Preservation of Register of Members etc. and Annual Return

As per Second Proviso to Section 94 (1), the period for which the registers, returns
and records are required to be kept shall be such as may be prescribed. In this
respect Rule 15 of the Companies (Management & Administration) Rules, 2014
states as under:

 Preservation of register of members: The register of members along with
       the index shall be preserved permanently and shall be kept in the custody
       of company secretary of the company or any other person authorised by the
       Board for such purpose.

 Preservation of register of debenture holders/other security holders:
       The register of debenture-holder or any other security holder along with the
       index shall be preserved for a period of 8 years from the date of redemption
       of debentures or securities, as the case may be, and shall be kept in the
       custody of the company secretary of the company or any other person
       authorized by the Board for such purpose.

 Preservation of Copies of documents filed with ROC: Copies of all annual
       returns prepared under section 92 and copies of all certificates and
       documents required to be annexed thereto shall be preserved for a period of
       8 years from the date of filing with the RoC.

 Preservation of Foreign Register of Members: The foreign register of
       members shall be preserved permanently, unless it is discontinued and all the
       entries are transferred to any other foreign register or to the principal register.

       Foreign register of debenture-holders or any other security holders shall be
       preserved for a period of 8 years from the date of redemption of such
       debentures or securities.

       The foreign register shall be kept in the custody of the company secretary
       or person authorised by the Board.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.31

Penalty for refusing the inspection or making any extract or copy required ­

 If any inspection or the making of any extract or copy required under this
       section is refused, the company and every officer of the company who is in
       default shall be liable for each such default, to a penalty of ` 1, 000 for every
       day subject to a maximum of ` 1, 00,000 during which the refusal or default
       continues. [Section 94 (4)]

 The Central Government* may also, by order, direct an immediate inspection
       of the document, or direct that the extract required shall forthwith be
       allowed to be taken by the person requiring it. [Section 94 (5)]

* Powers are delegated to Regional Directors.

REGISTERS, ETC. TO BE EVIDENCE [SECTION 95]

According to Section 95, the registers, indices and copies of annual return shall be prima
facie evidence of any matter directed or authorised to be inserted therein by or under
this Act.

     4. PRE-REQUISITES OF A MEETING

Before we move on to our next concept of types of meetings and the procedure
to convene them as per the Companies Act, 2013, let us understand the terms
which are important to know for convening a meeting.

· - Notice of                  During Meeting      · Minutes of
 meeting - Section                                  Meeting - Section
 101                    · Quorum for meetings -     118
 - Explanatory           Section 103
 Statement to be                                   · Inspection of
 annexed with           · Chairman of meetings      minute-books of
 notice - Section        - Section 104              GM - Section 119
 102
                        · Proxies - Section 105    · Maintenance &
        Before Meeting  · Voting - Sections 106 -   inspection of
                                                    documents in e-
                         110                        form - Section 120
                        · Resolutions - Sections
                                                         Post - Meeting
                         111, 114 - 117

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Key terms:

(a) General Meeting: It is the meeting of the shareholders of a
       company to be held as per the provisions of the Act. The
       general meeting can be an Annual General Meeting (AGM)
       or an Extraordinary General Meeting (EGM). An annual
       general meeting (AGM) is a mandatory yearly gathering of a
       company's shareholders. The objective of holding an AGM is to provide an
       opportunity to members to discuss the functioning of the company and
       take steps to protect their interests. They can discuss any matter relating to
       the conduct of the affairs of the company. An Extraordinary General
       Meeting (EGM) can be defined as a meeting of shareholders which is not an
       AGM. The objective of holding an EGM is to discuss any matter of urgent
       importance which cannot be postponed till the next Annual General
       Meeting.

(b) Board Meeting: It is the meeting of the Board of Directors of
       a company.

(c) Class Meeting: It is the meeting of particular class of
       persons, like, creditors, preference shareholders, debenture-
       holders, etc.

The pre-requisites of the meetings are, in general, applicable to all kinds of
meetings, although the time limits may differ and there might be a specific
mention of a certain type of meeting in the respective section.

NOTICE OF A MEETING [ SECTION 101]

Section 101 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013 states that in order to properly call a
general meeting, a notice of at least 21 clear days is required to be given either in
writing or through electronic mode in such manner as may be prescribed.

In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 101 shall apply in case of a
Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the
company. [Notification No. GSR 8 (E), dated 4th January, 2017.]

In case of section 8 company, in clause (1) of Sub-section (1) of Section 101 for
the words "21 days", the words "14 days" shall be substituted. This exception shall
be applicable to a section 8 company which has not committed a default in filing

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.33

its financial statements under section 137 or annual return under section 92 with
the Registrar. [Notification No. GSR 466 (E), 5-6-2015 as amended by Notification
No. GSR 584 (E), dated 13th June, 2017.]

Contents of the Notice [Section 101(2)]

Every notice of a meeting must state the place, date, day and the hour of the
meeting and shall contain a statement of business to be transacted at that
meeting.
Persons entitled to receive the Notice of the General Meeting [Section
101(3)]
The notice of every meeting of the company shall be given to:

(a) every member of the company, legal representative of any deceased
       member or the assignee of insolvent member;

(b) the auditor or auditors of the company;

(c) every director of the company.

Notice needs to be  * Members
      served to     * Legal representative of the deceased member
                    * Assignee of the insolvent member
                    * Auditor/auditors of the company
                    * Every director of the company

Meaning of 21 clear days:

The term `21 clear days' means that the date on which notice is served and the
date of meeting are excluded while sending the notice of a meeting. A company
cannot curtail the requirement of 21 clear days through its Articles of Association.

Note: Where a notice of a meeting is sent by post, it shall be deemed to be
served at the expiration of 48 hours after the letter containing the same is posted
(Rule 35(6) of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Sending of Notice of Meeting through Electronic Mode:

As per Rule 18 of the Companies (Management & Administration) Rules, 2014,
sending of notices through electronic mode has been statutorily recognized.
Accordingly, it is permitted for a company to give notice through electronic
mode.

The expression ``electronic mode'' shall mean any communication sent by a
company through its authorized and secured computer programme which is
capable of producing confirmation and keeping record of such communication
addressed to the person entitled to receive such communication at the last
electronic mail address provided by the member.

 A notice may be sent through e-mail as a:

        Text; or

        As an attachment to e-mail; or

        As a notification providing electronic link; or

        Uniform Resource Locator for accessing such notice.

 Rule 18(3)

        The e-mail shall be addressed to the person entitled to receive such
               e-mail as per the records of the company as provided by the
               depository.

               It is to be noted that the company shall provide an advance
               opportunity at least once in a financial year, to the member to register
               his e-mail address and the changes therein and such request may be
               made by only those members who have not got their e-mail ID
               recorded or to update a fresh e-mail ID and not from the members
               whose e-mail ids are already registered.

        The subject line in e-mail shall state the name of the company, notice
               of the type of meeting, place and the date on which the meeting is
               scheduled.

        If notice is sent in the form of a non-editable attachment to e-mail,
               such attachment shall be in the Portable Document Format or in a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.35

               non-editable format together with a `link or instructions' for recipient
               for downloading relevant version of the software.

        The company's obligation shall be satisfied when it transmits the e-
               mail and the company shall not be held responsible for a failure in
               transmission beyond its control.

        If a member entitled to receive notice fails to provide or update
               relevant e-mail address to the company, or to the depository
               participant as the case may be, the company shall not be in default for
               not delivering notice via e-mail.

        The company may send e-mail through in-house facility or its registrar
               and transfer agent or authorise any third-party agency providing bulk
               e-mail facility.

        The notice shall be placed simultaneously on the website of the
               Company, if any, and on the website as may be notified by Central
               Government.

Non-receipt of Notice: According to section 101(4) any accidental omission to
give notice to or the non-receipt of such notice by, any member or other person
who is entitled to such notice for any meeting shall not invalidate the
proceedings of the meeting. The onus is on the company to prove that the
omission was not deliberate.

Illustration 4

Mr. Abhinav, a member of Elixir Logistics Limited, filed a complaint against the
company for not serving him a notice for attending the Annual General Meeting.
The company, in turn, provided the proof that they had sent the notice, by way of
an email to Mr. Abhinav, inviting him to attend the annual general meeting of the
company. Mr. Abhinav alleges that he never received the email. State whether the
company is liable to be guilty for contravening the provisions of section 101 of the
Companies Act, 2013 read with the applicable Rules.

Answer: As per Rule 18 (3) (v) of the Companies (Management & Administration)
Rules, 2014, the company's obligation shall be satisfied when it transmits the e-
mail and the company shall not be held responsible for a failure in transmission
beyond its control. Also, Rule 18 (3) (vi) if a member entitled to receive the notice
fails to provide or update relevant e-mail address to the company, or to the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

depository participant as the case may be, the company shall not be in default for
not delivering notice via e-mail. Accordingly, Elixir Logistics Limited shall not be
held guilty if there was a failure in transmission beyond its control or in case
where Mr. Abhinav did not update his e-mail address.

Shorter notice of less than 21 days [Proviso to Section 101 (1)]

As noted earlier, usually general meetings need to be called by giving at least a
notice of 21 clear days.

However, a general meeting may be called after giving shorter notice than that
specified in sub-section (1) of Section 101, if consent, in writing or by electronic
mode, is accorded thereto:

(i) in the case of an annual general meeting, by not less than ninety-five per
       cent. of the members entitled to vote thereat; and

(ii) in the case of any other general meeting, by members of the company--

       (a) holding, if the company has a share capital, majority in number of
               members entitled to vote and who represent not less than ninety-five
               per cent. of such part of the paid-up share capital of the company as
               gives a right to vote at the meeting; or

       (b) having, if the company has no share capital, not less than ninety-five
               per cent. of the total voting power exercisable at that meeting.

Where any member of a company is entitled to vote only on some resolution or
resolutions to be moved at a meeting and not on the others, those members shall
be taken into account for the purposes of sub section (1) of section 101 in respect
of the former resolution or resolutions and not in respect of the latter.

Illustration 5

The paid-up share capital of Aakash Soaps Limited is ` fifty lakh divided into five
lakh shares of `10 each. The directors of the company are desirous of calling an
extra-ordinary general meeting (EGM) by giving a shorter notice which is less than
21 days. Sixty percent of the members holding shares worth ` forty lakh accorded
their consent by electronic mode to the shorter notice. Whether EGM can be validly
called.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.37

Answer: In the above case, consent to call the EGM by shorter notice has been
accorded by sixty percent members holding shares worth ` forty lakh which works
out to 80% (40,00,000/50,00,000 *100) whereas the requirement is that majority in
number of members who represent not less than 95% of paid-up share capital
which gives them a right to vote at the meeting (i.e. shareholders holding shares
worth ` 47,50,000) must consent to shorter notice. Therefore, the EGM cannot be
validly called and held.

Authority to call a General Meeting

A general meeting (AGM or EGM) has to be called by the Board of Directors. An
individual director does not have the authority to call a General Meeting. Any
notice of General Meeting given without the sanction of the Board is invalid;
however, the same can be ratified by the Board. For calling a General Meeting, the
Board passes a Board Resolution.

EXPLANATORY STATEMENT TO BE ANNEXED TO NOTICE [SECTION 102]6

Section 102 of the Companies Act, 2013 mentions that where any special business is
to be transacted at the company's general meeting, then an `Explanatory Statement'
shall be annexed to the notice calling such general meeting. The `Explanatory
Statement' must specify,

(a) the nature of concern or interest, financial or otherwise, if any, in respect of
       each items of--

       (i) every director and the manager, if any;

       (ii) every other key managerial personnel; and

       (iii) relatives of the persons mentioned in sub-clauses (i) and (ii);

(b) any other information and facts that may enable members to understand
       the meaning, scope and implications of the items of business and to take
       decision thereon.

Ordinary business and Special business: Companies Act, 2013 sets out two
types of businesses as under:

6 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 102 shall apply in case of a
Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the company.
Notification GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  7.38                    CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

  Ordinary business (OB)

  Special business. (SB)

Ordinary business includes the following business which are transacted at the
Annual General Meeting of a company­

(i) the consideration of financial statements and the reports of the Board of
       Directors and auditors;

(ii) the declaration of any dividend;

(iii) the appointment of directors in place of those retiring;

(iv) the appointment of, and the fixing of the remuneration of, the auditors.

                                    1.

                       Consideration of financial
                     statements and the reports of

                      the Board of Directors and
                                auditors

         4.                  Ordinary                     2.
                             business               Declaration
  Appointment of,
  and fixing of the       Section 102 (2)             of any
  remuneration of,                                   dividend

    the auditors

                                                     3.
                                             Appointment of
                                           Directors in place of
                                              those retiring

 In the case of AGM, all business to be transacted thereat except the ones
       stated above are special business. At the EGM, every business transacted is
       a special business. Explanatory statement is not required for transacting
       Ordinary Business.

 Proviso to section 102 (2) sets out that if any item of special business relates
       to, or affects, any other company, the extent of shareholding in that other
       company of every promoter, director, manager and of every other KMP shall
       be disclosed, if the extent of shareholding is 2% or more of the paid-up
       share capital of that other company.

 In case any item of business refers to any document which is to be
       considered at the meeting, then the time and place where such document
       can be inspected should also be specified in the explanatory statement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION              7.39

 Effect of non-disclosure/insufficient disclosure in Explanatory
       Statement [Section 102(4)]: If as a result of non-disclosure or insufficient
       disclosure in explanatory statement, any benefit accrues to a promoter,
       director, manager, other key managerial personnel or their relatives, such
       person shall hold such benefit in trust for the company, and shall, without
       prejudice to any other action being taken against him under this Act or
       under any other law for the time being in force, be liable to compensate the
       company to the extent of the benefit received by him.

Penalty for contravention of the provisions of section 102

Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (4), if any default is made in
complying with the provisions of this section, every promoter, director, manager
or other key managerial personnel of the company who is in default shall be
liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees or five times the amount of benefit
accruing to the promoter, director, manager or other key managerial personnel or
any of his relatives, whichever is higher. [Section 102 (5)]

QUORUM FOR MEETINGS [SECTION 103]7

Quorum means the minimum number of members who must be personally
present in order to constitute a valid meeting. Section 103 of the Companies Act,
2013 states that unless the articles of the company provide for a larger number,
the quorum for the meeting shall be as follows­

Public Company -                           Private Company -

If number of members is not more than      Two members personally
1000, quorum shall be 5 members            present shall be the Quorum.
personally present.

if the number of members is more than
1000 but upto 5000, then the quorum shall
be 15 members personally present

If the number of members exceed 5000,
then quorum shall be 30 members
personally present.

7 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 103 shall apply in case of a
Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the
company. Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Date 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.40  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

 It is to be noted that the term `members personally present' as mentioned
       above refers to the members entitled to vote in respect of the items of
       business on the agenda of the meeting.

Adjournment of Meeting for want of Quorum [Section 103 (2) and (3)]

If the quorum is not present within half-an-hour from the time appointed for
holding a meeting of the company:

(a) the meeting shall stand adjourned to the same day in the next week at the
       same time and place, or to such other date and such other time and place
       as the Board may determine; or

(b) the meeting, if called by requisitionists under section 100, shall stand
       cancelled:

Provided that in case of an adjourned meeting or of a change of day, time or
place of meeting under clause (a), the company shall give not less than three
days' notice to the members either individually or by publishing an advertisement
in the newspapers (one in English and one in vernacular language) which is in
circulation at the place where the registered office of the company is situated.

Quorum not present at the adjourned meeting also: Where quorum is not present
in the adjourned meeting also within half an hour, then the members present
shall form the quorum.

Note:

The following points have been prescribed by Secretarial Standard­ 2:

1. One person can be an authorised representative of more than one body
       corporate. In such a case, he is treated as more than one Member present in
       person for the purpose of Quorum. However, to constitute a meeting, at
       least two individuals shall be present in person. Thus, in case of a public
       company having not more than one thousand members with a Quorum
       requirement of five members, an authorised representative of five bodies
       corporate cannot form a Quorum by himself but can do so if at least one
       more member is personally present.

2. Quorum shall be present not only at the time of commencement of the
       Meeting but also while transacting business.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.41

3. Members who have voted by Remote e-voting have the right to attend the
       General Meeting and accordingly their presence shall be counted for the
       purpose of Quorum.

4. A Member who is not entitled to vote on any particular item of business
       being a related party, if present, shall be counted for the purpose of
       Quorum.

5. The stipulation regarding the presence of a Quorum does not apply with
       respect to items of business transacted through postal ballot.

Illustration 6

There are 54 members in Nice Games Private Limited. The company called its
annual general meeting on Friday, 1st July 2024 at 2:00 p.m. at its registered office.
There were 28 members present till 2:30 p.m. at the venue of the AGM. The
Chairman of the meeting proceeded to initiate the meeting and passed the
resolutions after observing due process. Comment whether the meeting took place
as per the provisions of Companies Act, 2013.

Answer: As per the provisions of Section 103 of the Companies Act, 2013, the
quorum for a Private Limited Company shall be two members personally present,
within half-an-hour from the time appointed for holding a general meeting of the
company. Thus, the quorum for the Annual General Meeting of Nice Games
Private Limited was complied with and the company has not contravened any of
the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.

Illustration 7

Abbey Lights and Sounds Limited has 2300 members. The company called its
Annual General Meeting on Tuesday, 23rd August, 2024 at 10.30 a.m. at its
registered office situated in Connaught Place, New Delhi. On the day of the
meeting, 18 members were personally present by 11.00 a.m. and the Chairman
proceeded to initiate the Annual General Meeting. There were 5 special businesses
to be discussed at the said meeting and by 2.30 p.m. Agenda 1 to 3 had been
discussed and appropriate resolutions were passed. However, due to some
emergency, 4 of the members had to leave around 3 p.m. The Chairman granted
them the permission and proceeded to discuss Agenda 4 and 5 and accordingly
passed resolutions as per the consent of the remaining members. Comment whether

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.42  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

the meeting is a properly convened meeting as per the provisions of section 103 of
the Companies Act, 2013.

Answer: According to Secretarial Standard- 2 (SS-2), Quorum shall be present not
only at the time of commencement of the Meeting but also while transacting
business.

In the above case, while the required quorum as per section 103 of the
Companies Act, 2013 was present at the time when the meeting started, the
quorum was not present at the time of deciding Agenda 4 and 5. Thus, where at
the time of transacting business, the number of members is less than the quorum
fixed for the meeting, the business cannot be transacted and shall be a nullity.

CHAIRMAN OF MEETING [SECTION 104]8

Election of Chairman by Members: Section 104 of the Companies Act, 2013
seeks to provide that unless the Articles of Association of the Company otherwise
provide, the members, personally present, shall elect among themselves to be the
Chairman on a show of hands.

Demand for Poll: The section further provides that if a poll is demanded on the
election of the Chairman, the Chairman elected by show of hands shall continue to
be the Chairman of the meeting until some other person is elected as Chairman as a
result of poll, and such other elected person shall be the Chairman for rest of the
meeting.

Powers of Chairman: Chairman of the meeting is the person who manages the
meetings and ensures that the required decorum of the meeting is maintained at
all times, till the meeting is concluded and post that, executes the minutes of the
meeting. The Chairman has prima facie authority to decide all questions which
arise at a meeting and which require decision at that time. In order to fulfil his
duty properly, he must observe strict impartiality.

Chairman to have `casting vote' if so provided in the Articles: The Chairman
has a casting vote in Board Meetings and general meetings, if specifically
empowered by the articles of the company. The term `casting vote' means that in

8 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 104 shall apply in case of
a Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the
company. Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.43

the event of equality of vote on a particular business being transacted at the
meeting, the Chairman of the meeting shall have a right to cast a second vote. If
there is no provision in the articles for a casting vote, an ordinary resolution on
which there is equality of votes is deemed to be dropped.

Exemption to a Private Company- In case of a private company - Section 104
shall apply, unless otherwise specified in respective section or the articles of the
company provide otherwise. - Notification No. GSR 464 (E), dated 5th June, 2015.

This exception shall be applicable to a private company which has not committed
a default in filing its financial statements under section 137 or annual return
under section 92 of the Act, with the Registrar. - Notification No. GSR 583 (E),
dated 13th June 2017.

     5. PROXIES [SECTION 105]9

Section 105 of the Companies Act, 2013 and Rule 19 of the Companies
(Management & Administration) Rules, 2014 contain provisions relating to the
proxies.

 Appointment of a proxy is an important right of a member of the company.
       Section 105 (1) provides that any member of a company who is entitled to
       attend and vote at a meeting of the company shall be entitled to appoint
       another person as a proxy to attend and vote at the meeting on his behalf.

       However, a proxy shall not have the right to speak at such meeting and shall
       not be entitled to vote except on a poll.

 Applicability of the sub-section (1)­ Unless the articles of a company
       otherwise provide, this sub-section shall not apply to a company not having
       a share capital. The Central Government may also prescribe a class or classes
       of companies whose members shall not be entitled to appoint another
       person as a proxy.

9 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 105 shall apply in case of a
Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the company.
Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.44  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       According to Rule 19, a member of a company registered under section 8
       (companies formed with charitable objects, etc.) shall not be entitled to
       appoint any other person as his proxy unless such other person is also a
       member of such company.

       A person can act as proxy on behalf of members not exceeding fifty and
       holding in aggregate not more than 10 per cent of the total share capital of
       the company carrying voting rights.

       However, a member who is holding more than 10 per cent of the total share
       capital of the company carrying voting rights may appoint a single person as
       a proxy and such person shall not act as proxy for any other person or
       shareholder. [Rule 19 (2)]

 As a compliance requirement, in every notice calling a meeting of a company
       which has a share capital, or the articles of which provide for voting by proxy
       at the meeting, there shall appear with reasonable prominence a statement
       that a member entitled to attend and vote is entitled to appoint a proxy, or,
       where that is allowed, one or more proxies, to attend and vote instead of
       himself, and that a proxy need not be a member. [Section 105 (2)]

 The appointment of proxy shall be in Form No. MGT-11. [Rule 19(3)]

 If the instrument appointing a proxy is in the prescribed Form, it shall not be
       questioned on the ground that it fails to comply with any special
       requirements specified for such instrument by the articles of a company.
       [Section 105 (7)]

 The instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing and signed by the
       appointer or his attorney duly authorised in writing. If the appointer is a body
       corporate, the instrument shall be under its seal or be signed by an officer or
       an attorney duly authorised by the body corporate. [Section 105 (6)]

 Section 105 (4) provides that a proxy received 48 hours before the meeting
       will be valid even if the articles provide for a longer period.

 Section 105 (8) provides that every member entitled to vote at a meeting of
       the company, or on any resolution to be moved thereat, shall be entitled
       during the period beginning twenty-four hours before the time fixed for the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.45

       commencement of the meeting and ending with the conclusion of the
       meeting, to inspect the proxies lodged, at any time during the business
       hours of the company, provided not less than three days' notice in writing of
       the intention so to inspect is given to the company.

In simple words, it can be said that:

- every member entitled to vote at a meeting of the company, or on any
       resolution to be moved thereat, shall be entitled to inspect the proxies
       lodged.

- for the purpose of inspection, a minimum three days' notice in writing is
       required to be given to the company.

- inspection by any member can be made during the period beginning
       twenty-four hours before the time fixed for the commencement of the
       meeting and ending with the conclusion of the meeting.

- inspection can be done at any time but only during the business hours of
       the company.

 Penalty for default

        If default is made in complying with section 105 (2), every officer of the
               company who is in default shall be liable to penalty of five thousand
               rupees. [Section 105(3)]

        If for the purpose of any meeting of a company, invitations to appoint
               as proxy a person or one of a number of persons specified in the
               invitations are issued at the company's expense to any member
               entitled to have a notice of the meeting sent to him and to vote
               thereat by proxy, every officer of the company who issues the
               invitation as aforesaid or authorises or permits their issue, shall be
               liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees.

               Provided that an officer shall not be liable under this sub-section by
               reason only of the issue to a member at his request in writing of a
               form of appointment naming the proxy, or of a list of persons willing
               to act as proxies, if the form or list is available on request in writing to
               every member entitled to vote at the meeting by proxy. [Section
               105(5)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.46  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

     6. VOTING [SECTION 106-109]

The votes cast by the shareholders play decisive role in the business proposed in
General Meetings of a company.

An equity shareholder has the right to vote for every motion. However, as per the
Section 47 of the Companies Act, 2013 preference shareholder is entitled to vote
only for a resolution pertaining to his rights.
The various modes through which a shareholder can cast his vote are as follows:
 Voting by show of hands ­ (section 107);
 Voting by electronic means ­ (section 108);
 Voting by demand of poll ­ (section 109);
 Voting by Postal Ballot ­ (section 110).

      Voting                                          Voting by
                                                   show of hands
                                                    (Section 107)

                                                            Voting by
                                                            electronic
                                                            means (Section
                                                            108)

                                                            Voting by Poll
                                                            (Section 109)

                                                              Voting by
                                                              Postal Ballot
                                                              (Section 110)

The right to vote is a personal right of a shareholder and he may use it as he likes
it. He may split his vote for and against the resolution.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.47

RESTRICTION ON VOTING RIGHTS [SECTION ­ 106]10

Section 106 (1) indicates the supremacy of Articles of Association and specifies
that the Articles of a company may provide that:

- no member shall exercise any voting right in respect of any share registered
       in his name on which any amount is due from him on calls or any other
       sums presently payable by him to the company have not been paid, or

- in regard to which the company has exercised any right of lien.

Section 106 (2) requires that a company shall not prohibit any member from
exercising his voting rights on any other ground except the grounds mentioned as
above.

On a poll taken at a meeting of a company, a member entitled to more than one
vote, or his proxy, where allowed, or other person entitled to vote for him, as the
case may be, need not, if he votes, use all his votes or cast in the same way all the
votes he uses. [Section 106 (3)]

In other words, on a poll being taken at a meeting of a company, a member
having more than one vote or his proxy, need not use all his votes or cast in the
same way all the votes he uses.

Also, such member cannot sign a requisition for an extra-ordinary general
meeting.

In case of joint shareholders, they must concur in voting unless the articles
provide to the contrary. Regulation 52 of Table F states as under:

(i) In the case of joint holders, the vote of the senior who tenders a vote,
       whether in person or by proxy, shall be accepted to the exclusion of the
       votes of the other joint holders.

(ii) For this purpose, seniority shall be determined by the order in which the
       names stand in the register of members.

10 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 106 shall apply in case of a
Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the
company. Notification No. GSR 8(E), Dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.48  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Note:

Where the articles of the company do not contain any provision restricting the
exercise of voting rights of members, then a member cannot be prevented from
voting, even though, calls or other sums payable by him have not been paid or
the company has exercised any right of lien over his shares. But, where the articles
contain any such provision, and the shares forfeited for non-payment of calls
have been re-allotted, the new allottee being liable for the balance, if any,
remaining unpaid on the shares would not be entitled to vote so long as any calls
presently payable on the shares remain unpaid.

Illustration 8

Suppose Mr. Subramaniam and Mrs. Sneha are joint shareholders of Sports
Equipment Private Limited holding 500 equity shares. In respect of a particular
special business being transacted at the extra-ordinary general meeting (EGM) of
the company, Mr. Subramaniam is in favour of passing the resolution whereas Mrs.
Sneha does not favour the resolution. Decide how should the vote be casted in case
such a situation arises?

Answer:

The voting in case of joint shareholders is done in the order of seniority, which is
determined on the basis of the order in which their names appear in the register of
members. The joint-holders have a right to instruct the company as to the order
in which their names shall appear in the register of members. Accordingly, in case
of Mr. Subramaniam and Mrs. Sneha, it is to be seen as to whose name appears
first in the register of members; and then to decide whether the vote is casted in
favour of resolution or against it.

Illustration 9

Consider a situation where directors are also the shareholders of the company.

Answer:

Directors, who are also the shareholders of the company, stand in a fiduciary
relationship with the company in their capacity as directors. However, a director
shall vote in the same manner as a common shareholder would have voted in a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.49

general meeting. Therefore, while casting his vote, he is not supposed to be
influenced by the fact that he is one of the directors of the company.

VOTING BY SHOW OF HANDS [SECTION 107]11
 According to section 107 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013, unless the voting is

       demanded by way of poll or by electronic means, the voting shall be done by
       way of show of hands in the first instance.
 Section 107(2) states that the declaration by the Chairman of the meeting of
       the passing of a resolution or otherwise by show of hands and an entry to
       that effect in the minutes books shall be conclusive evidence that the
       resolution has been passed.

Illustration 10

Can an insolvent shareholder vote at the general meeting by show of hands?

Answer: Yes. Notwithstanding that he has no longer any beneficial interest in the
shares and the dividends are payable only to his trustee in bankruptcy, an
insolvent shareholder so long as he remains in the register of the company as a
member, is entitled to exercise his votes which are attributed to his status as a
member.

VOTING THROUGH ELECTRONIC MEANS [SECTION 108]

Section 108 of the Companies Act, 2013 has introduced the facility of e-voting in
respect of prescribed classes of companies. Accordingly, the members of such
companies may exercise their right to vote by electronic means.

Rule 20 of the Companies (Management & Administration) Rules, 2014 provides a
detailed procedure for electronic voting.

Rule 20 (1) states that "voting through electronic means" shall apply in respect
of the general meetings for which notices are issued on or after the date of
commencement of Rule 20.

11 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 107 shall apply in case of a
Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the
company. Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.50  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Companies required to provide its members the facility of exercising right to
vote by electronic means [Rule 20 (2)]:

Every company which:

- has listed its equity shares on a recognised stock exchange; and

- has not less than one thousand members;

shall provide to its members facility to exercise their right to vote on resolutions
proposed to be considered at a general meeting by electronic means.

Exempted entity: However, a Nidhi, or an enterprise or institutional investor
referred to in Chapter XB or Chapter XC of the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2009 is not
required to provide the facility to vote by electronic means.

Explanation-I.- For the purpose of this sub-rule, "Nidhi" means a company which
has been incorporated as a Nidhi with the object of cultivating the habit of thrift
and savings amongst its members, receiving deposits from and lending to, its
members only, for their mutual benefit, and which complies with such rules as are
prescribed by the Central Government for regulation of such class of companies.

Explanation-II.- For the purposes of this rule, the expression-

 `cut-off date' means a date not earlier than seven days before the date of
       general meeting for determining the eligibility to vote by electronic means
       or in the general meeting. [Explanation II (ii) to Rule 20(2)]

 `cyber security' means protecting information, equipment, devices,
       computer, computer resource, communication device and information
       stored therein from unauthorised access, use, disclosures, disruption,
       modification or destruction;

 'electronic voting system' means a secured system based process of display
       of electronic ballots, recording of votes of the members and the number of
       votes polled in favour or against, in such a manner that the entire voting
       exercised by way of electronic means gets registered and counted in an
       electronic registry in a centralised server with adequate cyber security.
       [Explanation II(iv) to Rule 20(2)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.51

 'remote e-voting' means the facility of casting votes by a member using an
       electronic voting system from a place other than venue of general meeting.
       [Explanation II(v) to Rule 20(2)]

 `secured system' means computer hardware, software, and procedure that -

       (a) are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse;

       (b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;

       (c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and

       (d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures; [Explanation II (vi)
               to Rule 20(2)]

 'voting by electronic mean' includes "remote e-voting and voting" at the
       general meeting through an electronic voting system which may be the
       same as used for remote e-voting. [Explanation II (vii) to Rule 20(2)]

Exercise of right to vote through voting by electronic means by a member: A
member may exercise his right to vote through voting by electronic means on
resolutions and the company shall pass such resolutions in accordance with the
provisions of this rule.

Procedure: Rule 20 (4) states that a company which provides the facility to its
members to exercise voting by electronic means shall comply with the following
procedure:

(i) Notice of meeting: The notice of the meeting shall be sent to all the
       members, directors and auditors of the company either-

       (a) by registered post or speed post; or

       (b) through electronic means, namely, registered e-mail ID of the
               recipient; or

       (c) by courier service;

(ii) Placing of Notice on website: The notice shall also be placed on the
       website, if any, of the company and of the agency forthwith after it is sent
       to the members;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.52  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(iii) Particulars contained in Notice: The notice of the meeting shall clearly
       state-

       (a) that the company is providing facility for voting by electronic means
               and the business may be transacted through such voting;

       (b) that the facility for voting, either through electronic voting system or
               ballot or polling paper shall also be made available at the meeting and
               members attending the meeting who have not already cast their vote
               by remote e-voting shall be able to exercise their right at the meeting;

       (c) that the members who have cast their vote by remote e-voting prior
               to the meeting may also attend the meeting but shall not be entitled
               to cast their vote again.

(iv) The Notice shall:

       (a) indicate the process and manner for voting by electronic means;

       (b) indicate the time schedule including the time period during which the
               votes may be cast by remote e-voting;

       (c) provide the details about the login ID;

       (d) specify the process and manner for generating or receiving the
               password and for casting of vote in a secure manner.

(v) Publication of notice:

       The company shall cause a public notice by way of an advertisement to be
       published, immediately on completion of dispatch of notices for the
       meeting under clause (i) of sub-rule (4) but at least twenty-one days before
       the date of general meeting, at least once in a vernacular newspaper in the
       principal vernacular language of the district in which the registered office of
       the company is situated, and having a wide circulation in that district, and at
       least once in English language in an English newspaper having country-
       wide circulation, and specifying in the said advertisement, inter alia, the
       following matters, namely:-

       (a) statement that the business may be transacted through voting by
               electronic means;

       (b) the date and time of commencement of remote e-voting;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.53

       (c) the date and time of end of remote e-voting;

       (d) cut-off date;

       (e) The manner in which persons who have acquired shares and become
               members of the company after the dispatch of notice may obtain the
               login ID and password;

       (f) the statement that-

               (A) remote e-voting shall not be allowed beyond the said date and
                       time;

               (B) the manner in which the company shall provide for voting by
                       members present at the meeting;

               (C) a member may participate in the general meeting even after
                       exercising his right to vote through remote e-voting but shall
                       not be allowed to vote again in the meeting; and

               (D) a person whose name is recorded in the register of members or
                       in the register of beneficial owners maintained by the
                       depositories as on the cut-off date only shall be entitled to avail
                       the facility of remote e-voting as well as voting in the general
                       meeting;

       (g) website address of the company, if any, and of the agency where
               notice of the meeting is displayed; and

       (h) name, designation, address, email id and phone number of the person
               responsible to address the grievances connected with facility for
               voting by electronic means:

       Provided that the public notice shall be placed on the website of the
       company, if any, and of the agency;

(vi) Time for opening of e-voting: The facility for remote e-voting shall remain
       open for not less than three days and shall close at 5.00 p.m. on the date
       preceding the date of the general meeting;

(vii) Option for remote e-voting: During the period when facility for remote e-
       voting is provided, the members of the company, holding shares either in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.54  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       physical form or in dematerialized form, as on the cut-off date, may opt for
       remote e-voting.

       Provided that once the vote on a resolution is cast by the member, he shall
       not be allowed to change it subsequently or cast the vote again:

       Provided further that a member may participate in the general meeting
       even after exercising his right to vote through remote e-voting but shall not
       be allowed to vote again;

(viii) When to block facility: At the end of the remote e-voting period, the
       facility shall forthwith be blocked:

       Provided that if a company opts to provide the same electronic voting
       system as used during remote e-voting during the general meeting, the said
       facility shall be in operation till all the resolutions are considered and voted
       upon in the meeting and may be used for voting only by the members
       attending the meeting and who have not exercised their right to vote
       through remote e voting.

(ix) Appointment of scrutinizer(s): The Board of Directors shall appoint one or
       more scrutinizer, who may be Chartered Accountant in practice, Cost
       Accountant in practice, or Company Secretary in practice or an Advocate, or
       any other person who is not in employment of the company and is a person
       of repute who, in the opinion of the Board can scrutinize the voting and
       remote e-voting process in a fair and transparent manner.

       Provided that the scrutinizer so appointed may take assistance of a person
       who is not in employment of the company and who is well-versed with the
       electronic voting system;

(x) Willingness of scrutinizer for appointment: the scrutinizer shall be
       willing to be appointed and be available for the purpose of ascertaining the
       requisite majority;

(xi) Role of Chairman: The Chairman shall, at the general meeting, at the end
       of discussion on the resolutions on which voting is to be held, allow voting,
       as provided in clauses (a) to (h) of sub-rule (1) of rule 21, as applicable, with
       the assistance of scrutinizer, by use of ballot or polling paper or by using
       an electronic voting system for all those members who are present at the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.55

       general meeting but have not cast their votes by availing the remote e-
       voting facility.

(xii) Counting of votes: The scrutinizer shall, immediately after the conclusion
       of voting at the general meeting, first count the votes cast at the meeting,
       thereafter unblock the votes cast through remote e-voting in the presence
       of at least two witnesses not in the employment of the company and make,
       not later than three days of conclusion of the meeting, a consolidated
       scrutinizer's report of the total votes cast in favour or against, if any, to the
       Chairman or a person authorized by him in writing who shall countersign
       the same:

       Provided that the Chairman or a person authorized by him in writing shall
       declare the result of the voting forthwith;

       Explanation: It is hereby clarified that the manner in which members have
       cast their votes, that is, affirming or negating the resolution, shall remain
       secret and not available to the Chairman, Scrutiniser or any other person till
       the votes are cast in the meeting.

(xiii) Scrutinisers to have access to details relating to members: For the
       purpose of ensuring that members who have cast their votes through
       remote e-voting do not vote again at the general meeting, the scrutiniser
       shall have access, after the closure of period for remote e-voting and before
       the start of general meeting, to details relating to members, such as their
       names, folios, number of shares held and such other information that the
       scrutiniser may require, who have cast votes through remote e-voting but
       not the manner in which they have cast their votes.

(xiv) Maintenance of Register by scrutinisers: The scrutiniser shall maintain a
       register either manually or electronically to record the assent or dissent
       received, mentioning the particulars of name, address, folio number or
       client ID of the members, number of shares held by them, nominal value of
       such shares and whether the shares have differential voting rights.

(xv) Safe Custody of register: The register and all other papers relating to
       voting by electronic means shall remain in the safe custody of the
       scrutiniser until the Chairman considers, approves and signs the minutes
       and thereafter, the scrutiniser shall hand over the register and other related
       papers to the company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.56  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(xvi) Results along with the report of the scrutiniser to be placed on
       websites: The results declared along with the report of the scrutiniser shall
       be placed on the website of the company, if any, and on the website of the
       agency immediately after the result is declared by the Chairman:

       Provided that in case of companies whose equity shares are listed on a
       recognised stock exchange, the company shall, simultaneously, forward the
       results to the concerned stock exchange or exchanges where its equity
       shares are listed and such stock exchange or exchanges shall place the
       results on its or their website.

(xvii) Date when resolution shall be deemed to be passed: Subject to receipt of
       requisite number of votes, the resolution shall be deemed to be passed on
       the date of the relevant general meeting.

       Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, the requisite number of votes
       shall be the votes required to pass the resolution as the `ordinary resolution'
       or the `special resolution', as the case may be, under section 114 of the
       Companies Act, 2013.

(xviii) Resolution not to be withdrawn: A resolution proposed to be considered
       through voting by electronic means shall not be withdrawn.

DEMAND FOR POLL [SECTION 109]12

Section 109 provides that before or on the declaration of result of the voting on
any resolution on show of hands, a poll may be ordered to be taken by the
Chairman of the meeting on his own motion or on a demand made by the
`specified' members in that behalf.

 Members who can demand for poll:

        In case of a company having a share capital, by the members present
               in person or proxy, where allowed, and having not less than 1/10th of
               the total voting power or holding shares on which an aggregate sum
               of not less than ` 5,00,000 or such higher amount as may be
               prescribed has been paid­up.

12 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Section 109 shall apply in case of a
Specified IFSC public company, unless otherwise specified in the articles of the
company. Notification No. 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.57

        In case of any other company, by any member or members present in
               person or by proxy, where allowed, and having not less than 1/10th of
               the total voting power.

 Withdrawal of demand for poll: The demand for a poll may be withdrawn
       at any time by the persons who made the demand.

 To take forthwith poll demanded for adjournment of meeting or
       appointment of Chairman: A poll demanded for adjournment of the
       meeting or appointment of Chairman of the meeting shall be taken
       forthwith.

 When to take poll demanded on any other question: A poll demanded on
       any question other than adjournment of the meeting or appointment of
       Chairman shall be taken at such time, not being later than 48 hours from the
       time when the demand was made, as the Chairman of the meeting may
       direct.

 Appointment of sufficient number of scrutinizers: Where a poll is to be
       taken, the Chairman of the meeting shall appoint sufficient number of
       scrutinizers to scrutinize the poll process and votes given on poll and to
       report thereon to him.

 Duties of scrutinizer: The duties of a scrutinizer shall be as follows­

        To ensure proper conduct of the polling process;

        To maintain proper records of the poll;

        To submit a report to the Chairman of the meeting which shall contain
               the details of votes cast in the favour and against the resolution; and

        To ensure the compliance of the provisions of section 109 and
               Rule 21.

 Power of Chairman to regulate: The Chairman of the meeting shall have
       the power to regulate the manner in which the poll shall be taken.

 Rule 21 lays down the procedure describing the manner in which the
       Chairman shall get the poll process scrutinized-

        According to Rule 21 (1), the Chairman of the meeting shall ensure
               that:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.58  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

 The Scrutinizers are provided with the Register of Members,
       specimen signatures of the members, Attendance Register and
       Register of Proxies.

 The Scrutinizers are provided with all the documents received by
       the Company pursuant to sections 105, 112 and section 113.

 The Scrutinizers shall arrange for Polling papers and distribute
       them to the members and proxies present at the meeting; in
       case of joint shareholders, the polling paper shall be given to the
       first named holder or in his absence to the joint holder
       attending the meeting as appearing in the chronological order in
       the folio and the Polling paper shall be in Form No. MGT-12.

 The Scrutinizers shall keep a record of the polling papers
       received in response to poll, by initialling it.

 The Scrutinizers shall lock and seal an empty polling box in the
       presence of the members and proxies.

 The Scrutinizers shall open the Polling box in the presence of
       two persons as witnesses after the voting process is over.

 In case of ambiguity about the validity of a proxy, the
       Scrutinizers shall decide the validity in consultation with the
       Chairman.

 The Scrutinizers shall ensure that if a member who has
       appointed a proxy has voted in person, the proxy's vote shall be
       disregarded.

 The Scrutinizers shall count the votes cast on poll and prepare a
       report thereon addressed to the Chairman.

 Where voting is conducted by electronic means under the
       provisions of section 108 and rules made thereunder, the
       company shall provide all the necessary support, technical and
       otherwise, to the Scrutinizers in orderly conduct of the voting
       and counting the result thereof.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.59

                The Scrutinizers' report shall state total votes cast, valid votes,
                       votes in favour and against the resolution including the details
                       of invalid polling papers and votes comprised therein.

                The Scrutinizers shall submit the Report to the Chairman who
                       shall counter-sign the same.

                The Chairman shall declare the result of voting on poll. The
                       result may either be announced by him or a person authorized
                       by him in writing.

        The scrutinizers appointed for the poll, shall submit a report to the
               Chairman of the meeting in Form No. MGT-13. The report shall be
               signed by the scrutinizer and, in case there is more than one
               scrutinizer by all the scrutinizers, and the same shall be submitted by
               them to the Chairman of the meeting within seven days from the date
               the poll is taken. [Rule 21 (2)]

        The results of the poll shall be deemed to be the decision of the
               meeting on the resolution. [Section 109 (7)]

Applicability of section 101 to 107 and 109 to Private companies- Section 101 to
107 and 109 shall apply unless otherwise specified in respective sections or the
articles of the company provide otherwise. This exception shall be applicable to a
private company which has not committed a default in filing its financial
statements under section 137 or annual return under section 92 of the Act, with
the Registrar. [Notification No. 464 (E), dated 5th June, 2015 as amended by
Notification No. GSR 583 (E), dated 13th June 2017].

POSTAL BALLOT [SECTION 110]

Section 2(65) defines the term "postal ballot" to mean voting by post or through
any electronic mode.

The provisions relating to passing of resolutions by means of `postal ballot' are
contained in Section 110.

Further, Rule 22 of the Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014
contains the provisions relating to procedure to be followed for conducting
business through postal ballot.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.60  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Extract of Section 110 of the Companies Act, 2013

"(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a company:

       (a) shall, in respect of such items of business as the Central Government
               may, by notification, declare to be transacted only by means of postal
               ballot; and

       (b) may, in respect of any item of business, other than ordinary business
               and any business in respect of which directors or auditors have a right
               to be heard at any meeting, transact by means of postal ballot,

       in such manner as may be prescribed, instead of transacting such business
       at a general meeting.

       Provided that any item of business required to be transacted by means of
       postal ballot under clause (a), may be transacted at a general meeting by a
       company which is required to provide the facility to members to vote by
       electronic means under section 108, in the manner provided in that section.

(2) If a resolution is assented to by the requisite majority of the shareholders by
       means of postal ballot, it shall be deemed to have been duly passed at a
       general meeting convened in that behalf."

 Section 110 seeks to provide that the Central Government may declare
       certain items of business that can be transacted only by postal ballot. In
       addition, in respect of any other item of business (except ordinary business
       and any business in respect of which directors or auditors have a right to be
       heard at any meeting) postal ballot may be used.

 Sub-section (2) of Section 110 makes a deeming provision that if a
       resolution is assented by requisite majority of shareholders by means of
       postal ballot, it shall be deemed to have been passed at a general meeting
       convened in that behalf.

 Manner in which postal ballot shall be conducted is prescribed in Rule 22 of
       the Companies (Management & Administration) Rules, 2014. The same is
       described as under:

        Where a company is required or decides to pass any resolution by way
               of postal ballot, it shall send a notice to all the shareholders, along
               with a draft resolution explaining the reasons therefor and requesting

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.61

       them to send their assent or dissent in writing on a postal ballot
       because postal ballot means voting by post or through electronic
       means within a period of thirty days from the date of dispatch of the
       notice.

 The notice shall be sent either:

       (a) by Registered Post or speed post, or

       (b) through electronic means like registered e-mail id or

       (c) through courier service for facilitating the communication of the
               assent or dissent of the shareholder to the resolution within the
               said period of thirty days.

 An advertisement shall be published at least once in a vernacular
       newspaper in the principal vernacular language of the district in which
       the registered office of the company is situated, and having a wide
       circulation in that district, and at least once in English language in an
       English newspaper having a wide circulation in that district, about
       having dispatched the ballot papers and specifying therein, inter alia,
       the following matters, namely:-

       (a) a statement to the effect that the business is to be transacted by
               postal ballot which includes voting by electronic means;

       (b) the date of completion of dispatch of notices;

       (c) the date of commencement of voting;

       (d) the date of end of voting;

       (e) the statement that any postal ballot received from the member
               beyond the said date will not be valid and voting whether by
               post or by electronic means shall not be allowed beyond the
               said date;

       (f) a statement to the effect that members, who have not received
               postal ballot forms may apply to the company and obtain a
               duplicate thereof; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.62  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (g) contact details of the person responsible to address the
               grievances connected with the voting by postal ballot including
               voting by electronic means.

 The notice of the postal ballot shall also be placed on the website of
       the company forthwith after the notice is sent to the members and
       such notice shall remain on such website till the last date for receipt of
       the postal ballots from the members.

 The Board of directors shall appoint one scrutinizer, who is not in
       employment of the company and who, in the opinion of the Board can
       conduct the postal ballot voting process in a fair and transparent
       manner.

 The scrutinizer shall be willing to be appointed and be available for
       the purpose of ascertaining the requisite majority.

 Postal ballot received back from the shareholders shall be kept in the
       safe custody of the scrutinizer and after the receipt of assent or
       dissent of the shareholder in writing on a postal ballot, no person shall
       deface or destroy the ballot paper or declare the identity of the
       shareholder.

 The scrutinizer shall submit his report as soon as possible after the last
       date of receipt of postal ballots but not later than seven days thereof.

 The scrutinizer shall maintain a register either manually or
       electronically to record their assent or dissent received, mentioning
       the particulars of name, address, folio number or client ID of the
       shareholder, number of shares held by them, nominal value of such
       shares, whether the shares have differential voting rights, if any,
       details of postal ballots which are received in defaced or mutilated
       form and postal ballot forms which are invalid.

 The postal ballot and all other papers relating to postal ballot
       including voting by electronic means, shall be under the safe custody
       of the scrutinizer till the Chairman considers, approves and signs the
       minutes and thereafter, the scrutinizer shall return the ballot papers
       and other related papers or register to the company who shall
       preserve such ballot papers and other related papers or register safely.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.63

 The assent or dissent received after thirty days from the date of issue
       of notice shall be treated as if reply from the member has not been
       received.

 The results shall be declared by placing it, along with the scrutinizer's
       report, on the website of the company.

 The provisions of rule 20 regarding voting by electronic means shall
       apply, as far as applicable, mutatis mutandis to this rule in respect of
       the voting by electronic means.

 pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 110, the following
       items of business shall be transacted only by means of voting through
       a postal ballot--

       (a) alteration of the objects clause of the memorandum and in the
               case of the company in existence immediately before the
               commencement of the Act, alteration of the main objects of the
               memorandum;

       (b) alteration of articles of association in relation to insertion or
               removal of provisions which, under sub-section (68) of section 2,
               are required to be included in the articles of a company in order
               to constitute it a private company;

       (c) change in place of registered office outside the local limits of any
               city, town or village as specified in sub-section (5) of section 12;

       (d) change in objects for which a company has raised money from
               public through prospectus and still has any unutilized amount
               out of the money so raised under sub-section (8) of section 13;

       (e) issue of shares with differential rights as to voting or dividend or
               otherwise under sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of section 43;

       (f) variation in the rights attached to a class of shares or debentures
               or other securities as specified under section 48;

       (g) buy-back of shares by a company under sub-section (1) of section
               68;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.64  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               (h) election of a director under section 151 of the Act;

               (i) sale of the whole or substantially the whole of an undertaking of
                       a company as specified under sub-clause (a) of sub-section (1)
                       of section 180;

               (j) giving loans or extending guarantee or providing security in
                       excess of the limit specified under sub-section (3) of section 186:

       Provided that any aforesaid items of business under this sub-rule, required
       to be transacted by means of postal ballot, may be transacted at a general
       meeting by a company which is required to provide the facility to members
       to vote by electronic means under section 108, in the manner provided in
       that section.

       Provided further that One Person Companies and other companies having
       members upto two hundred are not required to transact any business
       through postal ballot.

How does the counting happen at the time of postal ballot?

It is important to know here that, a member who is voting by way of postal ballot,
has votes in proportion to his share in the paid-up share capital of the company.
And in this regard, he need not use all his votes in the same way. Therefore,
following types of postal ballots may be received from the shareholders­

(i) Ballots which contain assents;

(ii) Ballots which contain dissents;

(iii) Ballots wherein the member has voted partially assenting, partially
       dissenting or using not all his shares in any particular way; and

(iv) Invalid ballots (due to absence/mismatch of signature, overwriting, etc.)

The postal ballots shall be segregated as per the above criteria and resolution
shall be deemed as passed if assents are greater in number.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.65

     7. CIRCULATION OF MEMBERS' RESOLUTIONS
         [SECTION 111]

Circulation of members' resolution and statements: While the board enjoys the
primacy in setting the agenda of the meetings, the members are given a right under
section 111 to propose resolutions for consideration at the general meetings. The
number of members required to make a requisition under sub-section (1) of this section
are as required to requisition a general meeting in sub-section (2) of section 100.

(1) Prerequisites of a valid Requisition: The prerequisites for a valid
       requisition prescribed in sub-section (2) of section 111 are as under:

       (a) Requisition must be made in writing and signed

               (i) in the case of a company having a share capital, such number of
                       members who hold, on the date of the receipt of the requisition,
                       not less than one-tenth of such of the paid-up share capital of
                       the company as on that date carries the right of voting;

               (ii) in the case of a company not having a share capital, such
                       number of members who have, on the date of receipt of the
                       requisition, not less than one-tenth of the total voting power of
                       all the members having on the said date a right to vote.

       (b) Two or more copies of the said requisition are required to contain
               signatures of all the requisitionists.

       (c) The requisition must be deposited at the registered office of the
               company not less than six weeks before the meeting in the case of a
               requisition requiring notice of a resolution. In case of other
               resolutions, the same is to be deposited not less than two weeks
               before the meeting.

       (d) A sum reasonably sufficient to meet the company's expenses in giving
               effect to proposing the resolution is deposited or tendered. When the
               money is tendered, no payment is made but an unconditional offer is
               made to pay money.

       The proviso to sub-section (2) of section 111 provides that the time period
       provided above need not be complied with in case an annual general
       meeting is called on a date within six weeks after the copy has been

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.66  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       deposited. The copy of requisition, in such a case, shall be deemed to have
       been properly deposited for the purposes thereof although not deposited
       within the time required by this sub-section. The company is not duty
       bound to circulate the notice of the resolution when the prerequisites are
       not complied with.

(2) Notice to members: As per section 111 of the Companies Act, 2013, a
       company shall, on requisition in writing of such number of members, as
       required in section 100 (calling of EGM), give notice to members of any
       resolution which may properly be moved and is intended to be moved at a
       meeting; and circulate to members any statement with respect to the
       matters referred to in proposed resolution or business to be dealt with at
       that meeting.

(3) Exemption from circulation of any statement: The company shall not be
       bound to circulate any statement, if on the application either on behalf of
       the company or of any other person who claims to be aggrieved, the
        13Central Government, by order, declares that the rights conferred are being
       abused to secure needless publicity for defamatory matter.

(4) Order to bear the cost: An order made as above by the Central
       Government may also direct that the cost incurred by the company shall be
       paid to the company by the requisitionists, notwithstanding that they are
       not parties to the application.

(5) Default in complying with the provisions: If any default is made in
       complying with the provisions of this section, the company and every officer
       of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five
       thousand rupees.

     8. REPRESENTATION OF THE PRESIDENT &
         GOVERNORS IN MEETING OF COMPANIES TO
         WHICH THEY ARE MEMBER [SECTION 112]

Section 112 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that the President of India or
the Governor of a State, if he is a member of a company, may appoint such
person as he thinks fit to act as his representative at any meeting and such other

13 The Power of the Central Government has been delegated to Regional Director. MCA
Notification 4090 (E) dated 19th December, 2016.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.67

person shall be entitled to exercise the same rights and powers including the
right to vote by proxy and postal ballot, as the President or, as the case may be,
the Governor could exercise as a member of the company.

     9. REPRESENTATIONS OF CORPORATIONS
         MEETING OF COMPANIES AND CREDITORS
         [SECTION 113]

Section 113 of the Companies Act, 2013 seeks to provide that where a body
corporate is a member or a creditor including a holder of debentures of the
company and it authorises any person as its representative at any meeting of the
company or any class of members of the company or at any meeting of creditors
of the company, such representative shall be entitled to exercise the same rights
and powers including right to vote by proxy and by postal ballot on behalf of the
body corporate which he represents.

     10. RESOLUTIONS [SECTION 114­117]

In lay man's language, a resolution is the formal decision of an organization while
transacting a business at a meeting. A motion which has obtained the necessary
majority vote in its favour becomes a resolution. When a resolution is passed, a
company is bound by it.

Difference between Motion and Resolution

 Most matters come before a meeting by way of a motion recommending
       that the meeting may express approval or disapproval or take certain action
       or order something to be done.

 A motion is a proposal, and a resolution is the adoption of a motion duly
       made and seconded. But every motion need not be followed by a resolution,
       e.g. where a motion is made for the adjournment of the meeting.

 A motion whether it is passed for the closure of discussion or adjournment,
       etc. can be passed by an ordinary resolution unless there is a specific
       provision in the articles.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.68                        CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

ORDINARY AND SPECIAL RESOLUTION [SECTION 114]
As per the Companies Act, 2013, resolutions are of two types­
 Ordinary Resolutions ­ which are passed by simple majority; and
 Special Resolutions ­ votes cast in favour are not less than 3 times the

       number of the votes, if any, cast against the resolution by members so
       entitled and voting

                                                Resolutions

   Ordinary Resolution                                              Special resolution
passed by simple majority,                         votes cast in favour are not less than 3 times the

     i.e. more than 50%                              number of the votes, if any, cast against the

                                                    resolution by members so entitled and voting

Section 114 of the Companies Act, 2013 states as to what constitutes an Ordinary
Resolution and a Special Resolution.

Ordinary Resolution

Section 114(1) states that a resolution shall be ordinary resolution, if the notice
required under this Act has been duly given and it is required to be passed by the
votes cast, whether on a show of hands, or electronically or on a poll, as the case
may be, in favour of the resolution, including the casting vote, if any, of the
Chairman, by members, who, being entitled so to do, vote in person, or where
proxies are allowed, by proxy or by postal ballot, exceed the votes, if any cast
against the resolution by members, so entitled and voting.

Simply put, the votes cast in the favour of the resolution by any mode of voting
should exceed the votes cast against it.

Special Resolution

As per Section 114(2) of the Act, a resolution shall be a special resolution, when­

(a) The intention to propose the resolution as a special resolution has been
       duly specified in the notice calling the general meeting or other intimation
       given to the members of the resolution;

(b) The notice required under this Act has been duly given; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.69

(c) The votes cast in favour of the resolution, whether on a show of hands, or
       electronically or on a poll, as the case may be, by members who, being
       entitled so to do, vote in person or by proxy or by postal ballot, are required
       to be not less than 3 times the number of the votes, if any, cast against the
       resolution by members so entitled and voting.

Characteristics of Special Resolution

              1. Specified Majority - 3 times of the number of votes cast against

                   2. Resolution shall be set out in the notice

                  3. Proper notice of 21 days is given for holding the general meeting

             4. Explanatory Statement should be annexed to the notice for conducting special
                 business

Illustration 11
The Annual General Meeting of Super Star Bakers Limited was attended by 60
members. In respect of a particular business, the resolution was to be passed as a
special resolution. Ten members voted against the resolution whereas five abstained
themselves from the voting. The Chairman of the meeting Mr. Ravinder declared
that the resolution was passed as a special resolution. Whether the declaration is
valid.
Answer: In case of a special resolution, the requirement is that the votes cast in
favour of the resolution must be three times the number of the votes cast against
it. In the above case, ten members voted against the resolution which implies that
minimum thirty members (three times of ten) must vote in favour of the
resolution. Ignoring five members who abstained themselves from voting, forty-
five members (sixty minus ten minus five) voted in favour of the resolution which
far exceeds the required majority of thirty members. Therefore, declaration by Mr.
Ravinder, Chairman of the meeting, that the resolution was passed as a special
resolution is valid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.70  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Illustration 12

In the annual general meeting of Steel Products Limited, the notice contained the
agenda for 8 special businesses to be transacted. The Chairman decided to move all
the resolutions at one time in order to save time of the members present at the
meeting. Discuss whether two or more resolutions can be moved together as per the
provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.

Answer: For the sake of avoiding confusion and mixing up, the resolutions are
moved separately. However, there is nothing illegal if the Chairman of the
meeting decides that two or more resolutions should be moved together, unless
any member requires that each resolution should be put to vote separately or
unless a poll is demanded in respect of any.

The only case where a resolution should be moved separately is the one which
requires that as regards the appointment of directors at a general meeting of a
public or private company, where two or more directors may not be appointed as
directors by a single resolution.

Where notice has been given of several resolutions, each resolution must be put
separately. However, if the meeting unanimously adopts all the resolutions, this
would be immaterial.

RESOLUTIONS REQUIRING SPECIAL NOTICE [SECTION 115]

Section 115 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with rule 23 of Companies
(Management and Administration) Rules, 2014 deals with resolutions
requiring special notice

According to Section 115 where, by any provision contained in this Act or in the
Articles of a company, special notice is required for passing any resolution, then
the notice of the intention to move such resolution shall be given to the company
by such number of members holding not less than 1% of the total voting power,
or holding shares on which such aggregate sum not exceeding five lakh
rupees, as may be prescribed, has been paid-up.

Special notice for passing a resolution is required in the following cases

(a) Resolution for appointment of an auditor other than the retiring auditor at
       an annual general meeting. [Section 140 (4)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.71

(b) Resolution at an annual general meeting providing expressly that a retiring
       auditor shall not be re-appointed. [Section 140 (4)]

(c) Resolution to remove a director before the expiry of his period of office.
       [Section 169 (2)]

(d) Resolution to appoint another person as director in place of the removed
       director at the meeting at which he is removed. [(Section 169 (2)]

Further, the articles may provide for certain additional matters which require
special notice.

Rule 23 specifies the procedure to be followed in respect of Special Notice as
under:

1. A special notice required to be given to the company shall be signed, either
       individually or collectively by such number of members holding not less
       than one percent of total voting power or holding shares on which an
       aggregate sum of not less than 5,00,000 rupees has been paid up on the
       date of the notice.

2. The afore-mentioned notice shall be sent by members to the company not
       earlier than 3 months but at least 14 days before the date of meeting at
       which the resolution is to be moved, exclusive of the day on which the
       notice is given and the day of the meeting.

3. The company shall immediately after receipt of the notice, give its members
       notice of the resolution at least seven days before the meeting, exclusive of
       the day of dispatch of notice and day of the meeting, in the same manner as
       it gives notice of any general meetings.

4. Where it is not practicable to give the notice in the same manner as it gives
       notice of any general meetings, the notice shall be published in English
       language in English newspaper and in vernacular language in a vernacular
       newspaper, both having wide circulation in the State where the registered
       office of the Company is situated and such notice shall also be posted on
       the website, if any, of the Company.

5. The notice shall be published at least seven days before the meeting,
       exclusive of the day of publication of the notice and day of the meeting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.72  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

RESOLUTIONS PASSED AT ADJOURNED MEETING [SECTION 116]

As per Section 116 of the Companies act, 2013, where a resolution is passed at an
adjourned meeting of:

(a) a company; or

(b) the holders of any class of shares in a company; or

(c) the Board of Directors of a company,

the resolution shall be treated as having been passed on the day on which it was
actually passed and not on any earlier date.

Example

The extra-ordinary general meeting of the company, Purple Cosmetics Private
Limited was due to be held on Thursday, 1st August, 2024. However, due to want
of quorum, the meeting was adjourned to a later date on Thursday, 8th August,
2024 and two resolutions were passed on that date.

According to section 116 of the Companies Act, 2013, the said two resolutions
shall be deemed to have been passed on the adjourned date of meeting, i.e.
Thursday, 8th August, 2024 and not on the earlier date.

RESOLUTIONS AND AGREEMENTS TO BE FILED [SECTION 117]
Section 11714&15 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that a copy of every
resolution or any agreement, in respect of matters specified in sub-section (3)
together with the explanatory statement under section 102, if any, annexed to the
notice calling the meeting in which the resolution is proposed, shall be filed with
the Registrar within thirty days of the passing or making thereof in such manner
and with such fees as may be prescribed.

Provided that the copy of every resolution which has the effect of altering the
articles and the copy of every agreement referred to in sub-section (3) shall be

14 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Sub-section (1) of section 117, for the
words "thirty days" read as "sixty days". Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January,
2017.
15 In case of Specified IFSC Private Company - Sub-section (1) of section 117, for the
words "thirty days" read as "sixty days". Notification No. GSR 9 (E), Dated 4th January,
2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.73

embodied in or annexed to every copy of the articles issued after passing of the
resolution or making of the agreement.

According to Rule 24 of the Companies (Management and Administration) Rules,
2014, a copy of every resolution or any agreement required to be filed, together
with the explanatory statement under section 102, if any, shall be filed with the
Registrar in Form No. MGT-14 along with the fee.

Resolutions and agreements to be filed with the Registrar as per section
117(3) are as under:­

 Special Resolutions

 Resolutions which have been agreed to by all the members of a company,
       but which, if not so agreed to, would not have been effective for their
       purpose unless they had been passed as special resolutions;

 Any resolution of the Board of Directors of a company or agreement
       executed by a company, relating to the appointment, re-appointment or
       renewal of the appointment, or variation of the terms of appointment, of a
       managing director;

 Resolutions or agreements which have been agreed to by any class of
       members but which, if not so agreed to, would not have been effective for
       their purpose unless they had been passed by a specified majority or
       otherwise in some particular manner; and all resolutions or agreements
       which effectively bind such class of members though not agreed to by all
       those members.

 Resolutions requiring a company to be wound up voluntarily passed in
       pursuance of section 59 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.

 16 & 17Resolutions passed in pursuance of sub-section (3) of section 179.

16 In case of a private company - clause (g) of Sub-section 3 of Section 117 shall not
apply.
The above mentioned exemption shall be applicable to a private company which has not
committed a default in filing its financial statements under section 137 or annual return under
section 92 with the Registrar- Notification No. GSR 464 (E), dated 5th June, 2015 as amended
by Notification No. GSR 583 (E), dated 13th June, 2017.
17 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company - Clause (g) of sub-section (3) of section
117 shall not apply. Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  7.74                    CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

  Provided that no person shall be entitled under section 399 to inspect or
  obtain copies of such resolutions;

  Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in respect
  of a resolution passed to grant loans, or give guarantee or provide security
  in respect of loans under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 179 in the
  ordinary course of its business by,

  (a) a banking company;

  (b) any class of non-banking financial company registered under Chapter
         IIIB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, as may be prescribed in
         consultation with the Reserve Bank of India;

  (c) any class of housing finance company registered under the National
         Housing Bank Act, 1987, as may be prescribed in consultation with the
         National Housing Bank; and

  any other resolution or agreement as may be prescribed and placed in the

  public domain.

Penalty for contravention [Section 117(2)]

If any company fails to file the resolution or the agreement under sub-section (1)
before the expiry of the period specified therein, such company shall be liable to
a penalty of ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further
penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such
failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees and every officer of
the company who is in default including liquidator of the company, if any, shall be
liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a
further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during which
such failure continues, subject to a maximum of fifty thousand rupees.

     11. MINUTES (SECTION 118)

 Section 118 of the Companies Act, 2013, states that every company shall
       prepare, sign and keep minutes of every general meeting of any class of
       shareholders or creditors, including the meeting called by the requisitionists,
       and every resolution passed by postal ballot and every meeting of its Board
       of Directors or of every committee of the Board, within 30 days of the
       conclusion of every such meeting concerned, or passing of resolution by

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.75

       postal ballot in books kept for that purpose with their pages consecutively
       numbered. [Sub-section (1)]18 & 19

 The minutes of each meeting shall contain a fair and correct summary of the
       proceedings that took place at the concerned meeting.

 All appointments made at any of the meetings aforesaid shall be included in
       the minutes of the meeting.

 In the case of a Board Meeting or a meeting of a committee of the Board,
       the minutes shall also contain­

        the names of the directors present at the meeting; and

        in the case of each resolution passed at the meeting, the names of the
               directors, if any, dissenting from, or not concurring with the
               resolution.

 There shall not be included in the minutes, any matter which, in the opinion
       of the Chairman of the meeting­

        is or could reasonably be regarded as defamatory of any person; or

        is irrelevant or immaterial to the proceedings; or

        is detrimental to the interests of the company.

 The matter to be included or excluded in the minutes of the meetings on the
       afore-said grounds shall be at the absolute discretion of the Chairman of the
       meeting.

18In case of Specified IFSC Public Company- In Sub-section (1) of section 118, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that in case of a Specified IFSC public company, the minutes of every
meeting of its Board of Directors or of every committee of the Board, to be prepared and
signed in the manner as may be prescribed under sub section (1) at or before the next
Board or committee meeting, as the case may be and kept in books kept for that
purpose.".- Notification Date 4th January, 2017
19 In case of Specified IFSC Private Company- In Sub-section (1) of section 118, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that in case of a Specified IFSC private company, the minutes of every
meeting of its Board of Directors or of every committee of the Board, to be prepared and
signed in the manner as may be prescribed under sub section (1) at or before the next
Board or committee meeting, as the case may be and kept in books kept for that
purpose.".- Notification Date 4th January, 2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.76  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

 The minutes kept in accordance with the provisions of section 118 shall serve
       as the evidence of the proceedings recorded therein.

 Where the minutes have been kept in accordance with section 118 (1), then
       until the contrary is proved, the meeting shall be deemed to have been duly
       called and held, and all proceedings thereat to have duly taken place, and
       the resolutions passed by postal ballot to have been duly passed and in
       particular, all appointments of directors, key managerial personnel, auditors
       or company secretary in practice, shall be deemed to be valid.

 No document, purporting to be a report of the proceedings of any general
       meeting of a company shall be circulated or advertised at the expense of the
       company, unless it includes the matters requires by this section to be
       contained in the minutes of the proceedings of such meeting.

 Every company shall observe Secretarial Standards with respect to general
       and Board meetings, specified by the Institute of Company Secretaries of
       India and approved as such by the Central Government.20 & 21 [Section 118 (10)]

 Penalty for contravention­

        If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section
               in respect of any meeting, the company shall be liable to a penalty of
               ` 25,000 and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
               liable to a penalty of ` 5,000.

        If a person is found guilty of tampering with the minutes of the
               proceedings of the meeting, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
               for a term which may extend to 2 years and with fine which shall not
               be less than ` 25,000 but which may extend to ` 1,00,000.

       Rule 25 of the Companies (Management & Administration) Rules, 2014
       prescribes the procedure for maintenance of minutes of proceedings of
       general meeting, meeting of Board of Directors and other meetings and
       resolutions passed by postal ballot as follows­

        Distinct minute books to be maintained for each type of meeting: A
               distinct minute book shall be maintained for each type of meeting
               namely:

20 In case of Specified IFSC Public Company- Sub-section (10) of section 118 Shall not
apply. - Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.
21 In case of Specified IFSC Private Company- Sub-section (10) of section 118 Shall not
apply. - Notification No. GSR 9 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.77

       (i) general meetings of the members;

       (ii) meetings of the creditors

       (iii) meetings of the Board; and

       (iv) meetings of each of the committees of the Board.

       Note: Resolutions passed by postal ballot shall be recorded in the
       minute book of general meetings as if it has been deemed to be
       passed in the general meeting.

 Maximum time allowed for entering minutes of proceedings: The
       minutes of proceedings of each meeting shall be entered in the books
       maintained for that purpose along with the date of such entry within
       thirty days of the conclusion of the meeting.

 Data to be entered when a resolution is passed by Postal Ballot: In case
       of every resolution passed by postal ballot, a brief report on the postal
       ballot conducted including the resolution proposed, the result of the
       voting thereon and the summary of the scrutinizer's report shall be
       entered in the minutes book of general meetings along with the date
       of such entry within thirty days from the date of passing of resolution.

 Signing of Minute Books: Each page of every such book shall be
       initialled or signed and the last page of the record of proceedings of
       each meeting or each report in such books shall be dated and signed­

       (i) in the case of minutes of proceedings of a meeting of the Board
               or of a committee thereof, by the chairman of the said meeting
               or the Chairman of the next succeeding meeting;

       (ii) in the case of minutes of proceedings of a general meeting, by
               the Chairman of the same meeting within the aforesaid period of
               thirty days or in the event of the death or inability of that
               Chairman within that period, by a director duly authorised by the
               Board for the purpose;

       (iii) In case of every resolution passed by postal ballot, by the
               Chairman of the Board within the aforesaid period of thirty days
               or in the event of there being no Chairman of the Board or the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  7.78  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

                       death or inability of that Chairman within that period, by a
                       director duly authorized by the Board for the purpose.

        Place of keeping minute books of general meetings and their
               preservation: The minute books of general meetings shall be kept at
               the registered office of the company and shall be preserved
               permanently and kept in the custody of the company secretary or any
               director duly authorised by the board.

        Place of keeping minute books of Board and committee meetings and
               their preservation: The minute books of the Board and committee
               meetings shall be preserved permanently and kept in the custody of
               the company secretary of the company or any director duly authorized
               by the Board for the purpose and shall be kept in the registered office
               or such place as Board may decide.

Exemption to Section 8 companies: In case of section 8 companies (companies
formed with charitable objects, etc.), section 118 shall not apply as a whole except
that minutes may be recorded within 30 days of the conclusion of every meeting
in case of companies where the articles of association provide for confirmation of
minutes by circulation.

The exceptions, modifications and adaptations, shall be applicable to a section 8
company which has not committed a default in filing its financial statements
under 137 or Annual Return under section 92 with the Registrar. Notification No.
GSR 466 (E), dated 5th June, 2015 as amended by Notification No. GSR 584 (E),
dated 13th June, 2017.

  12. INSPECTION OF MINUTES-BOOKS OF
      GENERAL MEETING [SECTION 119]

Section 119 of the Companies Act, 2013 contains the provisions in respect of
inspection of minute-books of general meeting.

Accordingly, the books containing the minutes of the proceedings of any general
meeting of a company shall­

  be kept at the registered office of the company; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                          7.79

  be open for inspection, during business hours, by any member, without

  charge, subject to such reasonable restrictions as specified in the articles of

  the company or as imposed in the general meeting. However, at least 2

  hours in each business day shall be allowed for inspection. [Section 119 (1)]

Any member shall be entitled to be furnished, within seven working days after he
has made a request in that behalf to the company, and on payment of such fees
as may be prescribed, with a copy of any minutes. [Section 119 (2)]

In other words, within 7 working days of making a request along with the
requisite fees, the member shall be furnished with a copy of any minutes.

Penalty for contravention [Section 119 (3)]

If any inspection under sub-section (1), is refused by the company to the member,
or if the copy of minute-book is not furnished within the time specified under sub-
section (2), then the company shall be liable to a penalty of ` 25,000 and every
officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of ` 5,000 for
each such refusal or default, as the case may be.

Power of Tribunal to order inspection [Section 119 (4)]

In case of any such refusal or default, the Tribunal may, without prejudice to any
action being taken under sub-section (3), by order, direct an immediate
inspection of the minute-books or direct that the copy required shall forthwith be
sent to the person requiring it.

Copy of minute book of general meeting [Rule 26]

Any member shall be entitled to be furnished, within seven working days after he
has made a request in that behalf to the company, with a copy of any minutes of
any general meeting, on payment of such sum as may be specified in the articles
of association of the company, but not exceeding a sum of ten rupees for each
page or part of any page:

Provided that a member who has made a request for provision of soft copy in
respect of minutes of any previous general meetings held during a period
immediately preceding three financial years shall be entitled to be furnished, with
the same free of cost.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.80  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS IN ELECTRONIC
FORM [SECTION 120]

Section 120 of the Companies Act, 2013 seeks to provide that any document,
record, register or minute, etc., required to be kept by a company or allowed to
be inspected or copies given to any person by a company under this Act, may be
kept or inspected or copies given, as the case may be, in electronic form in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.

Provisions prescribed in Rules 27, 28 and 29 of the Companies (Management and
Administration) Rules, 2014 are relevant in this respect. Rule 30 states the penalty
in case of contravention.

Companies which may maintain records in electronic form: Rule 27 of the
Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014 states as under:

 Every listed company or a company having at least 1000 shareholders,
       debenture-holders and other security holders, may maintain its records, as
       required to be maintained under the Act or rules made thereunder, in
       electronic form.

       Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub- rule, it is hereby clarified that in
       case of existing companies, data 1[may] be converted from physical mode to
       electronic mode within six months from the date of notification of provisions
       of section 120 of the Act.

 The records in electronic form shall be maintained in such manner as the
       Board of directors may think fit:

       Provided that -

       (a) the records are maintained in the same formats and in accordance
               with all other requirements as provided in the Act or the rules made
               thereunder;

       (b) the information as required under the provisions of the Act or the
               rules made thereunder should be adequately recorded for future
               reference;

       (c) the records must be capable of being readable, retrievable and
               reproducible in printed form;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.81

       (d) the records are capable of being dated and signed digitally wherever
               it is required under the provisions of the Act or the rules made
               thereunder;

       (e) the records, once dated and signed digitally, shall not be capable of
               being edited or altered;

       (f) the records shall be capable of being updated, according to the
               provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder, and the date of
               updating shall be capable of being recorded on every updating.

 Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule, the term "records" means any
       register, index, agreement, memorandum, minutes or any other document
       required by the Act or the rules made thereunder to be kept by a company.

Who is responsible for the maintenance and security of electronic records:
Rule 28 sets out that the Managing Director, Company Secretary or any other
director or officer of the company as the Board may decide shall be responsible
for the maintenance and security of electronic records.

The person who is responsible for the maintenance and security of electronic
records shall-

(a) provide adequate protection against unauthorized access, alteration or
       tampering of records;

(b) ensure against loss of the records as a result of damage to, or failure of the
       media on which the records are maintained;

(c) ensure that the signatory of electronic records does not repudiate the signed
       record as not genuine;

(d) ensure that computer systems, software and hardware are adequately secured
       and validated to ensure their accuracy, reliability and consistent intended
       performance;

(e) ensure that the computer systems can discern invalid and altered records;

(f) ensure that records are accurate, accessible, and capable of being
       reproduced for reference later;

(g) ensure that the records are at all times capable of being retrieved to a readable
       and printable form;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.82              CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(h) ensure that records are kept in a non-rewritable and non-erasable format like
       pdf. version or some other version which cannot be altered or tampered;

(i) ensure that at least one backup, taken at a periodicity of not exceeding one
       day, are kept of the updated records kept in electronic form, every backup is
       authenticated and dated and such backups shall be securely kept at such
       places as may be decided by the Board;

(j) limit the access to the records to the managing director, company secretary or
       any other director or officer or persons performing work of the company as
       may be authorized by the Board in this behalf;

(k) ensure that any reproduction of non-electronic original records in electronic
       form is complete, authentic, true and legible when retrieved;

(l) arrange and index the records in a way that permits easy location, access and
       retrieval of any particular record; and

(m) take necessary steps to ensure security, integrity and confidentiality of records.

Inspection and copies of records maintained in electronic form: Rule 29 states
that the records maintained in electronic form shall be made available for
inspection by the company in electronic form. Copies of the records maintained in
electronic form, containing a clear reproduction of the whole or part thereof, shall
be provided on payment of not exceeding ` 10 per page.

     13. GENERAL MEETINGS

Now that we have understood the basic terms which are required to call, convene
and conduct the meetings properly, let us discuss the provisions related to
meetings given in the Companies Act, 2013. The Act describes two types of
general meetings to be held by a company. They are­

General Meetings                                       Annual General Meeting
                                                               Section 96

                                                   Extra-ordinary General Meeting
                                                              Section 100

                                                           read with Rule 17

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.83

ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING (AGM) [SECTION 96]

 Section 96(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 states that every company,
       whether public or private, except One Person Company, shall hold an annual
       general meeting every year and that the gap between two AGMs shall not be
       more than 15 months.

 The company shall specify the meeting as such [i.e. Annual General Meeting
       (AGM)] in the notices calling it.

Holding of Annual General Meeting (AGM)

 Annual general meeting should be held once every year.

 First annual general meeting of the company should be held within 9 months
       from the closing of the first financial year. Hence it shall not be necessary for
       the company to hold any annual general meeting in the year of its
       incorporation.

 Subsequent annual general meetings of the company should be held within
       6 months from the closing of the financial year.

 The gap between two annual general meetings should not exceed 15
       months.

Extension of validity period of AGM

In case, it is not possible for a company to hold an annual general meeting within
the prescribed time, the Registrar may, for any special reason, extend the time
within which any annual general meeting shall be held. Such extension can be for
a period not exceeding 3 months. No such extension of time can be granted by
the Registrar for the holding of the first annual general meeting.

Illustration 13

Abbeys Grocers Private Limited closed its financial year on 31st March, 2024. When
should it hold is Annual General Meeting (AGM) for the financial year 2023-24?

Answer: According to section 96 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013, Abbeys Grocers
Private Limited should hold its annual general meeting for the financial year
2023-24 latest by 30th September 2024 unless an extension is granted by
jurisdictional Registrar of Companies for any special reason.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.84  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Illustration 14

Abbyrush Mechanics Limited was incorporated on 12th July, 2024. When should the
company hold its first Annual General Meeting (AGM)?

Answer: In the above case, the financial year of Abbyrush Mechanics Limited will
close on 31st March, 2025. According to section 96 (1), the company must hold its
first AGM latest by 31st December 2025 i.e. within 9 months of the close of its
financial year on 31st March 2025. If Abbyrush Mechanics Limited holds its first
AGM in this manner, it shall not be necessary for the company to hold any AGM
in the year of its incorporation.

Time and place for holding an annual general meeting: Section 96 (2) states
that every annual general meeting shall be called during business hours, i.e.,
between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. on any day that is not a National Holiday and shall be
held either at the registered office of the company or at some other place within
the city, town or village in which the registered office of the company is situated.

Provided that annual general meeting of an unlisted company may be held at any
place in India if consent is given in writing or by electronic mode by all the
members in advance.

Provided further that the Central Government may exempt any company from the
provisions of this sub-section subject to such conditions as it may impose.

Explanation--For the purposes of this sub-section, "National Holiday" means and
includes a day declared as National Holiday by the Central Government.

Exemption to Section 8 companies:

In case of Section 8 company- In Sub-section (2) of Section 96 after the proviso
and before the explanation the following proviso shall be inserted;

Provided further that the time, date and place of each annual general meeting are
decided upon before-hand by the board of directors having regard to the
directions, if any, given in this regard by the company in its general meeting. -
Notification No. GSR 466 (E), dated 5th, June 2015.

The above-mentioned exception shall be applicable to a section 8 company which
has not committed a default in filing of its financial statements under section 137
or annual return under section 92 with the Registrar. - Notification No. GSR 584
(E), dated 13th June, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.85

Exemption to Government companies:

In case of Government company, section 96(2) shall be read as:

`Every annual general meeting shall be called during business hours, that is,
between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. on any day that is not a National Holiday and shall be
held either at the registered office of the company or at such other place within
the city, town or village in which the registered office of the company is situate or
such other place as the Central Government may approve in this behalf.
Notification No. GSR 463 (E), dated 5th June, 2015 read with Notification Dated
13th June, 2017.

The above-mentioned exception/ modification/ adaptation shall be applicable to
Government company which has not committed a default in filing of its financial
statements under section 137 or annual return under section 92 with the
Registrar. - Notification No. GSR 582 (E), dated 13th June, 2017'.

POWER OF TRIBUNAL TO CALL ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
[SECTION 97]

In case a company defaults in holding Annual General Meeting, then Section 97 of
the Companies Act, 2013 empowers Tribunal to call AGM. The provisions of
Section 97 are as under:
(1) If any default is made in holding the annual general meeting of a company

       under section 96, the Tribunal may, notwithstanding anything contained in
       this Act or the articles of the company, on the application of any member of
       the company, call, or direct the calling of, an annual general meeting of the
       company and give such ancillary or consequential directions as the Tribunal
       thinks expedient:
       Provided that such directions may include a direction that one member of
       the company present in person or by proxy shall be deemed to constitute a
       meeting.
(2) A general meeting held in pursuance of sub-section (1) shall, subject to any
       directions of the Tribunal, be deemed to be an annual general meeting of
       the company under this Act.

POWER OF TRIBUNAL TO CALL MEETINGS OF MEMBERS, ETC.
[SECTION 98]

(1) If for any reason it is impracticable to call a meeting of a company, other
       than an annual general meeting, in any manner in which meetings of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.86  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       company may be called, or to hold or conduct the meeting of the company
       in the manner prescribed by this Act or the articles of the company, the
       Tribunal may, either suo motu or on the application of any director or
       member of the company who would be entitled to vote at the meeting,--

       (a) order a meeting of the company to be called, held and conducted in
               such manner as the Tribunal thinks fit; and

       (b) give such ancillary or consequential directions as the Tribunal thinks
               expedient, including directions modifying or supplementing in relation
               to the calling, holding and conducting of the meeting, the operation
               of the provisions of this Act or articles of the company:

       Provided that such directions may include a direction that one member of
       the company present in person or by proxy shall be deemed to constitute a
       meeting.

(2) Any meeting called, held and conducted in accordance with any order made
       under sub-section (1) shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be a meeting of
       the company duly called, held and conducted.

PUNISHMENT FOR DEFAULT IN COMPLYING WITH THE PROVISIONS
OF SECTION 96 TO 98 [SECTION 99]

Section 99 lists out the punishment for contravention of section 96 to 98.

Accordingly, if any default is made in holding a meeting of the company in
accordance with section 96 (i.e. AGM) or section 97 (i.e. AGM called by Tribunal)
or section 97 (a meeting of members other than AGM called by Tribunal) or in
complying with any the directions issued by the Tribunal, then the company and
every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to ` 1,00,000 and in the case of a continuing default, with a further
fine which may extend to ` 5,000 for every day during which the default
continues.

REPORT ON ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING [SECTION 121]

According to Section 121 of the Companies Act, 2013, every listed public
company shall prepare a report on each annual general meeting including the
confirmation to the effect that the meeting was convened, held and conducted as
per the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.87

A copy of the report is to be filed with the Registrar in Form No. MGT-15 within
thirty days of the conclusion of AGM along with the prescribed fee. According to
Rule 31 of the Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014, the
report shall be prepared in the following manner:
(a) the report under this section shall be prepared in addition to the minutes of

       the general meeting;
(b) the report shall be signed and dated by the Chairman of the meeting or in case

       of his inability to sign, by any two directors of the company, one of whom shall
       be the Managing Director, if there is one and company secretary of the
       company;

(c) the report shall contain the details in respect of the following, namely:-

       (i) the day, date, hour and venue of the AGM;

       (ii) confirmation with respect to appointment of Chairman of the meeting;

       (iii) number of members attending the meeting;

       (iv) confirmation of Quorum;

       (v) confirmation with respect to compliance of the Act and the Rules,
               secretarial standards made thereunder with respect to calling,
               convening and conducting the meeting;

       (vi) business transacted at the meeting and result thereof;

       (vii) particulars with respect to any adjournment, postponement of
               meeting, change in venue; and

       (viii) any other points relevant for inclusion in the report.

(d) the report shall contain fair and correct summary of the proceedings of the
       meeting.

Penalty for default : If the company fails to file the report within 30 days of
conclusion of AGM, such company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees
and in case of continuing failure, with further penalty of five hundred rupees for
each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum
of five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
liable to a penalty which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees and in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.88  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

case of continuing failure, with further penalty of five hundred rupees for each
day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of
one lakh rupees.

EXTRA-ORDINARY GENERAL MEETINGS [SECTION 100]

All general meetings other than annual general meetings are called extra-ordinary
general meetings (EGMs). Section 100 of the Companies Act, 2013 contains
provisions regarding the calling of EGMs.

Calling of EGM

       Board of    Requisitionists
       Directors    themselves, if
                   Board does not
          on a
      requisition          call

                    Board of
                    Directors
                   on its own

                                     Who can call EGM

22 & 231. By Board of Directors on its own -
       The Board may, whenever it deems fit, call an extraordinary general
       meeting of the company.

22 In case of Specified IFSC Private Company - In sub-section (1) of section 100, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that in case of a Specified IFSC private company, the Board may subject to
the consent of all the shareholders, convene its extraordinary general meeting at any
place within or outside India.".- Notification No. 9 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.
23In case of Specified IFSC Public Company- In sub-section (1) of section 100, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that in case of a Specified IFSC public company, the Board may subject to the
consent of all the shareholders, convene its extraordinary general meeting at any place
within or outside India.". Notification No. GSR 8 (E), Dated 4th January, 2017.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.89

       Provided that an extraordinary general meeting of the company, other than
       of the wholly owned subsidiary of a company incorporated outside India,
       shall be held at a place within India. [Section 100 (1)]

2. By the Board of Directors at the requisition of ­

       (a) In the case of company having a share capital, such number of members
               who hold, on the date of receipt of requisition, at least 1/10th of such
               paid-up share capital of the company as on that date carries the right of
               voting;

       (b) In the case of company not having a share capital, such number of
               members who have, on the date of receipt of requisition, at least 1/10th
               of total voting power of all the members having on the said date a right
               to vote. [Section 100 (2)]

       The requisition shall set out the matters for the consideration of which the
       meeting is to be called and shall be signed by the requisitionists and sent to
       the registered office of the company. [Section 100 (3)]

       Note: The Board must, within 21 days from the date of receipt of a valid
       requisition, proceed to call a meeting on a day not later than 45 days from
       the date of receipt of such requisition.

3. By requisitionists themselves: If the Board does not, within twenty-one
       days from the date of receipt of a valid requisition in regard to any matter,
       proceed to call a meeting for the consideration of that matter on a day not
       later than forty-five days from the date of receipt of such requisition, the
       meeting may be called and held by the requisitionists themselves within a
       period of three months from the date of the requisition. [Section 100 (4)]

       A meeting under sub-section (4) by the requisitionists shall be called and
       held in the same manner in which the meeting is called and held by the
       Board. [Section 100 (5)]

       Any reasonable expenses incurred by the requisitionists in calling a meeting
       under sub-section (4) shall be reimbursed to the requisitionists by the
       company and the sums so paid shall be deducted from any fee or other
       remuneration under section 197 payable to such of the directors who were
       in default in calling the meeting. [Section 100 (6)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.90  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Rule 17 of the Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014 contain
provisions with regard to calling of EGM by requisitionists as under:

(1) The members may requisition convening of an extraordinary general
       meeting in accordance with sub-section (4) of section 100, by providing
       such requisition in writing or through electronic mode at least clear twenty-
       one days prior to the proposed date of such extraordinary general meeting.

(2) The notice shall specify the place, date, day and hour of the meeting and
       shall contain the business to be transacted at the meeting.-

       Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-rule, it is hereby clarified that
       requisitionists should convene meeting at Registered Office or in the same
       city or town where Registered office is situated and such meeting should be
       convened on any day except National Holiday.

(3) If the resolution is to be proposed as a special resolution, the notice shall be
       given as required by sub-section (2) of section 114.

(4) The notice shall be signed by all the requisitionists or by a requisitionist
       duly authorised in writing by all other requisitionists on their behalf or by
       sending an electronic request attaching therewith a scanned copy of such
       duly signed requisition.

(5) No explanatory statement as required under section 102 need be annexed
       to the notice of an extraordinary general meeting convened by the
       requisitionists and the requisitionists may disclose the reasons for the
       resolution(s) which they propose to move at the meeting.

(6) The notice of the meeting shall be given to those members whose names
       appear in the Register of members of the company within three days on
       which the requisitionists deposit with the Company a valid requisition for
       calling an extraordinary general meeting.

(7) Where the meeting is not convened, the requisitionists shall have a right to
       receive list of members together with their registered address and number
       of shares held and the company concerned is bound to give a list of
       members together with their registered address made as on twenty first day
       from the date of receipt of valid requisition together with such changes, if

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.91

       any, before the expiry of the forty-five days from the date of receipt of a
       valid requisition.

(8) The notice of the meeting shall be given by speed post or registered post or
       through electronic mode. Any accidental omission to give notice to, or the
       non-receipt of such notice by, any member shall not invalidate the
       proceedings of the meeting.

Illustration 15

The members of Blumove Peacocks Appliances Private Limited, holding more than
1/10th voting power of the company, requisitioned the Board of Directors to call a
general meeting on 14th July, 2024. However, the directors did not pay any heed to
such a requisition and therefore, no general meeting was called. Discuss the
consequences of the contravention of not calling a general meeting on the
requisition of required number of members in accordance with the Companies Act,
2013.

Answer: In the above case, the requisition for calling a general meeting is made
by the sufficient number of requisitionists and therefore, the Board Directors is
required to initiate the process of calling the meeting. According to section 100
(4), if the Board does not, within 21 days from the date of receipt of a valid
requisition, proceed to call a meeting within 45 days from the date of receipt of
such requisition, then the requisitionists may themselves call and hold the
meeting. This can be done within a period of three months from the date of the
requisition. According to section 100 (5), a meeting by the requisitionists shall be
called and held in the same manner in which the meeting is called and held by
the Board of Directors.

Accordingly, the requisitionists being members of Blumove Peacocks Appliances
Private Limited can call and hold the general meeting within a period of three
months from the date of the requisition since the Board was not inclined to call
such a meeting within the stipulated time after the requisition was made.

Illustration 16

The Board of Directors of Vishnu Orchards Limited, a company having its registered
office in New Delhi, did not proceed to call a meeting despite receipt of a
requisition from the required number of requisitionists. In view of this,
requisitionists themselves decided to call the meeting to be held in Madrid, Spain on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.92           CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

2nd October, 2024. Discuss whether the general meeting can be convened on the
said date and place.

Keeping in view the facts of the above case, the meeting cannot be convened as
proposed to be held by the requisitionists. As per Rule 17 (2) of the Companies
(Management and Administration) Rules, 2014, the requisitionists should hold the
meeting at the registered office of the company or in the same city or town in
which the registered office is situated. In addition, the day of holding the meeting
should be a working day and not a National Holiday. It is to be noted that 2nd
October, 2024 is a National Holiday.

14. APPLICABILITY OF THIS CHAPTER TO ONE
    PERSON COMPANY [SECTION 122]

Applicability of Chapter VII to One Person Company (OPC)
                           [Section 122]

Provisions of    Ordinary                           Resolutions of    If there is
 Section 98    business shall                      AGM/EGM to be    one director
and Sections                                        communicated
 100 to 111          be                            by the Member       in OPC,
  shall not    transacted as                                        resolution of
                provided in                         of OPC to the   Board to be
    apply       Sub-Section                         Company and      entered in
               (3) of section
                                                      entered in      relevant
                     122                                relevant      Minutes
                                                    Minutes book      book.

(1) Section 122 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013 states that the provisions of
       section 98 and section 100 to 111 shall not apply to a One Person Company
       (OPC). An overview of these sections is as under:

Section No.    Heading of Section
Section 98     Power of Tribunal to call meetings of members, etc.
Section 100    Calling of EGM
Section 101    Notice of meeting
Section 102    Statement to be annexed to notice

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.93

Section 103  Quorum for meetings
Section 104  Chairman of meetings
Section 105  Proxies
Section 106  Restrictions on voting rights
Section 107  Voting by show of hands
Section 108  Voting through electronic means
Section 109  Demand for poll
Section 110  Postal ballot
Section 111  Circulation of Members' Resolution

(2) The ordinary businesses as mentioned under section 102 (2) (a), which a
       company is required to transact at an AGM, shall be transacted in the case
       of One Person Company, as provided in sub-section (3). [Section 122 (2)]

(3) For the purposes of section 114, any business which is required to be
       transacted at an annual general meeting or other general meeting of a
       company by means of an ordinary or special resolution, it shall be sufficient
       if, in case of One Person Company, the resolution is communicated by the
       member to the company and entered in the minutes-book required to be
       maintained under section 118 and signed and dated by the member and
       such date shall be deemed to be the date of the meeting for all the
       purposes under this Act. [Section 122 (3)]

       In other words, following procedure shall be adopted for any business to be
       transacted at an AGM or any other meeting (i.e. EGM) of OPC:

       (i) The resolution of AGM or EGM shall be communicated by the
                 member to the company;

       (ii) The said resolution shall be entered in the relevant minutes book.

       (iii) The minutes book shall be signed and dated by the member.

       Note: The date on which the minutes book is signed by the member shall be
       deemed to be the date of the meeting for all the purposes.

(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where there is only one director on
       the Board of Director of a One Person Company, any business which is

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.94  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       required to be transacted at the meeting of the Board of Directors of a
       company, it shall be sufficient if, in case of such One Person Company, the
       resolution by such director is entered in the minutes book required to be
       maintained under section 118 and signed and dated by such director and
       such date shall be deemed to be the date of the meeting of the Board of
       Directors for all the purposes under this Act. [Section 122 (4)]

       Simply stated, in case OPC has only one director, following procedure shall
       be adopted for any business to be transacted at the meeting of Board of
       Directors:

       (i) The resolution by such director shall be entered in the relevant
               minutes book.

       (ii) The minutes book shall be signed and dated by such director.

       Note: The date on which the minutes book is signed by the director shall be
               deemed to be the date of the meeting for all the purposes.

Penalty

If any default is made in compliance with any of the provisions of this rule, the
company and every officer or such other person who is in default shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and where the
contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees for every day after the first during which such contravention
continues. [Rule 30]

SUMMARY

 The Chapter discusses about the registers and returns to be kept and
       maintained by the company as per the provisions of the Companies Act,
       2013 and the types of meetings to be held in accordance with the Act. It
       also discusses the terms relevant to properly convening and conducting of
       the meetings.

 Section 89 states that a person holding beneficial interest in the shares of a
       company shall intimate the company about such interest in Form No. MGT­
       4 or MGT-5, as applicable, and thereafter, the company shall intimate the
       RoC about the interest of member within 30 days in Form No. MGT­6.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.95

 Section 90 requires a significant beneficial owner to make a declaration to
       the company specifying the nature of his interest and other prescribed
       particulars.

 Section 91 deals with the time limits within which the registers of the
       company are allowed to be closed and also mentions the penalty for
       contravention. It states that the registers may be closed for a maximum of 30
       days at a time and 45 days in aggregate in a year.

 Section 92 provides that every company shall file its Annual Return in Form
       No. MGT-7 except One Person Company (OPC) and Small Company. One
       Person Company and Small Company shall file Annual Return from the
       financial year 2020-2021 onwards in Form No. MGT-7A which is an abridged
       form of Annual Return.

 Section 92 provides that annual return is to be filed after the conclusion of
       each Annual General Meeting and specifies the contents to be included in
       the annual return.

 The annual return shall be signed by a director of the company and the
       Company Secretary; and in case, there is no Company Secretary, by a
       Company Secretary in Practice.

 In case of One Person Company and small company, the annual return shall
       be signed by the Company Secretary, or where there is no Company
       Secretary, by the director of the company.

 Section 94 describes that the registers and returns and other documents of the
       company shall be kept at the registered office of company. However, they can
       also be kept at any other place where more than 1/10th of the total members
       reside but the same should be approved by way of a special resolution.

 There are two types of general meetings that are held within the company ­
       Annual General Meeting as mentioned in section 96 and Extra-Ordinary
       General Meeting as stated in section 100.

 Section 96 discusses about the annual general meeting (AGM) to be held in a
       company every year and prescribes that the AGM shall be held within 6
       months from the date of the closing of the financial year and that the gap
       between two AGMs shall not exceed 15 months.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.96  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

 In case of a newly incorporated company, first Annual General Meeting shall
       be held within 9 months from the closing of the first financial year.
       Accordingly, the company is not required to hold any annual general
       meeting in the year of its incorporation.

 The AGM shall be held within the business hours and on a working day, i.e.
       other than National Holidays.

 In case of default in holding Annual General Meeting, the Tribunal is
       empowered to call, or direct the calling of, an annual general meeting of the
       company. The Tribunal may give such ancillary or consequential directions as
       it thinks expedient.

 If for any reason it is impracticable to call a meeting of a company other
       than AGM, the Tribunal may, either suo motu or on the application of any
       director or member, order a meeting of the company to be called, held and
       conducted in such manner as it thinks fit.

 Listed public companies shall file a report on AGM with the RoC in MGT­15
       within 30 days of the AGM.

 Section 100 prescribes the provisions for holding an Extra-ordinary General
       Meeting (EGM) and states that either the board of directors or specified
       number of members making a requisition to the Board, are authorised to call
       an EGM.

 A notice is required to be sent to the members and others for calling the
       general meetings. The notice shall specify the place, date, day and the hour
       of the meeting and shall also contain a statement of the business to be
       transacted at such meeting.

 Quorum is the minimum number of members who must be personally
       present in order to constitute a valid meeting.

 Quorum needs to be present not only at the time of commencement of the
       meeting but also while transacting business.

 A Chairman needs to be appointed for the meetings. In the absence of any
       contrary provision in the Articles of a company, the members personally
       present at the meeting shall elect one of themselves to be the Chairman
       thereof on a show of hands.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.97

 Any member of a company who is entitled to attend and vote at a meeting
       of the company shall be entitled to appoint another person as a proxy to
       attend and vote at the meeting on his behalf. The appointment of proxy shall
       be in Form No. MGT-11.

 At any general meeting, a resolution put to vote of the meeting shall be
       decided on a show of hands except where a poll is demanded or the voting
       is carried out electronically.

 There are certain items of business which need to be transacted only by
       means of voting through a postal ballot.

 If a resolution is assented to by the requisite majority of the shareholders by
       means of postal ballot, it shall be deemed to have been duly passed at a
       general meeting convened in that behalf.

 The members of a company have a right to propose resolutions for
       consideration at the general meetings.

 A resolution can be ordinary resolution or a special resolution. Ordinary
       resolution can be passed by simple majority whereas special resolution
       requires minimum 75% majority for its passing.

 A resolution passed at an adjourned meeting shall be treated as having been
       passed on the day on which it was actually passed and not on any earlier
       date.

 Copies of specified resolutions and agreements are required to be filed with
       the Registrar of Companies.

 As regards minutes, every company shall prepare, sign and keep minutes of
       every general meeting including the meeting called by the requisitionists,
       every resolution passed by postal ballot and every meeting of its Board of
       Directors or of every committee of the Board.

 The minutes kept in accordance with the prescribed provisions shall serve as
       the evidence of the proceedings recorded therein.

 The books containing the minutes of the proceedings of any general
       meeting shall be open for inspection during business hours by any member,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.98  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       without charge, subject to certain reasonable restrictions. At least 2 hours in
       each business day shall be allowed for inspection.

 Any document, record, register or minute, etc., required to be kept or
       allowed to be inspected or copies given to any person by a company, may
       be kept or inspected or copies given, as the case may be, in electronic form.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. The Annual General Meeting (AGM) of Green Limited was held on 31.8.2024.
       Suppose the Chairman of the company after two days of AGM went abroad
       for next 31 days. Due to the unavailability of the Chairman, within time
       period prescribed for submission of copy of report of AGM with the registrar,
       the report as required was signed by two Directors of the company, of which
       one was additional Director of the company. Comment on the signing of this
       report of AGM.

       (a) Yes, the signing is in order as the report can be signed by any director in
               the absence of Chairman.

       (b) No, the signing is not in order as only the Chairman is authorised to
               sign the report

       (c) Yes, the signing is in order, as in the absence of Chairman at least two
               directors should sign the report.

       (d) No, the signing is not in order, since in case the Chairman is unable to
               sign, the report shall be signed by any two directors of the company,
               one of whom shall be the Managing director, if there is one and
               company secretary of the company.

2. The AGM shall be called by giving 21 clear days' notice. However, it can be
       called by giving shorter notice if members entitled to vote at that meeting
       give their consent in writing or by electronic mode. In such cases how many
       members have to give their consent?

       (a) 75% of members entitled

       (b) 90% of members entitled

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.99

       (c) 91% of members entitled

       (d) 95% of members entitled

3. Which among the following companies is not required to provide its members
       the facility to exercise right to vote by electronic mode under the provisions of
       the Companies Act, 2013?

       (a) B Limited, whose equity shares (the company is having both equity as
               well as preference shares) are listed on a recognised stock exchange.

       (b) A Limited, whose equity shares (only type of share the company is
               having) are listed on a recognised stock exchange

       (c) C Limited, whose preference shares (the company is having both equity
               as well as preference shares) are listed on a recognised stock exchange

       (d) D Limited, whose equity shares as well as preference shares are listed on
               a recognised stock exchange.

Descriptive Questions

1. In a General meeting of Alpha Software Limited, the chairman directed to
       exclude certain matters detrimental to the interest of the company from the
       minutes, Mukesh, a shareholder contended that the minutes of the meeting
       must contain fair and correct summary of the proceedings thereat. Decide,
       whether the contention of Mukesh is maintainable under the provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013?

2. A General Meeting was scheduled to be held on Friday, 15th April, 2024 at
       3.00 P.M. As per the notice the members who are unable to attend a meeting
       in person can appoint a proxy and the proxy forms duly filled should be sent
       to the company so as to reach at least 48 hours before the meeting. Mr. X, a
       member of the company appoints Mr. Y as his proxy and the proxy form dated
       09-04-2024 was deposited by Mr. Y with the company at its registered Office
       on 11-04-2024. Similarly, another member Mr. W also gives two separate
       proxies to two individuals named Mr. M and Mr. N. In the case of Mr. M, the
       proxy dated 12-04-2024 was deposited with the company on the same day
       and the proxy form in favour of Mr. N was deposited on 14-04-2024. All the
       proxies viz., Y, M and N were present before the meeting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.100  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       According to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, who would be the
       persons allowed to represent as proxies for members X and W respectively?

3. M. H. Mechanics Company Limited served a notice of General Meeting upon
       its shareholders. The notice stated that the issue of sweat equity shares would
       be considered at such meeting. Mr. `A', a shareholder of the M. H. Mechanics
       Company Limited complains that the issue of sweat equity shares was not
       specified fully in the notice. Is the notice issued by M. H. Mechanics Company
       Limited regarding issue of sweat equity shares valid according to the
       provisions of the Companies Act, 2013? Explain in detail.

4. Tulip Gardens Ltd. maintains its Register of Members at its registered office in
       Mumbai. A group of members residing in Kolkata wants to keep the register
       of members at Kolkata.

       (i) Keeping in view the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, explain
               whether Tulip Gardens Ltd. can keep the Registers and Returns at
               Kolkata.

       (ii) Whether Mr. Rich, a director holding only 400 shares of worth ` 4000,
               has the right to inspect the Register of Members?

5. Examine the validity of the following situation with reference to the relevant
       provisions of the Companies Act, 2013:

       The Board of Directors of Shreya Transporters and Logistics Ltd. called an
       extra-ordinary general meeting upon the requisition of members. However,
       the meeting was adjourned on the ground that the quorum was not present at
       the meeting. Advise the company.

6. Zorab Garments Limited served a notice of General Meeting upon its
       members. The notice stated that a resolution to increase the share capital of
       the company would be considered at such meeting. Roshni, a shareholder of
       the company complained that the amount of the proposed increase was not
       specified in the notice. Is the notice valid?

7. Examine the validity of the following decisions of the Board of Directors with
       reference of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.

       (i) In an Annual General Meeting of a company having share capital, 80
               members present in person or by proxy holding more than 1/10th of the
               total voting power, demanded for poll. The chairman of the meeting

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.101

               rejected the request on the ground that only the members present in
               person can demand for poll.

       (ii) In an annual general meeting, during the process of poll, the members
               who earlier demanded for poll want to withdraw it. The chairman of the
               meeting rejected the request on the ground that once poll started, it
               cannot be withdrawn.

8. Surya, a shareholder, gives a notice for inspecting proxies, five days before the
       meeting is scheduled and approaches the company two days before the
       scheduled meeting for inspecting the same. What is the legal position in
       respect of demand for inspection of proxies by Surya as per the provisions of
       the Companies Act, 2013

9. There are certain entities to which the Companies (Significant Beneficial
       Owners) Rules, 2018 are not applicable. List them.

10. Infotech Ltd. was incorporated on 1.4.2022. No General Meeting of the
       company has been held till 30.4.2024. Discuss the provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013 regarding the time limit for holding the first annual
       general meeting of the Company and the power of the Registrar to grant
       extension of time for the First Annual General Meeting.

11. The Articles of Association of DJA Water Tanks Ltd. require the personal
       presence of 7 members to constitute quorum of General Meetings. The
       company has 965 members as on the date of meeting. The following persons
       were present in the extra-ordinary general meeting to consider the
       appointment of Managing Director:

       (i) A is the representative of Governor of Uttar Pradesh.

       (ii) B and C are preference shareholders,

       (iii) D is representing Y Ltd. and Z Ltd.

       (iv) E, F, G and H are proxies of shareholders.

       Could it be said that the quorum was present in the meeting?

12. What do you mean by Proxy? Explain the provisions relating to appointment
       of proxy under the Companies Act, 2013.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.102  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

13. Super Mart Limited called its AGM in order to lay down the financial
       statements for the approval of the shareholders. Due to want of Quorum, the
       meeting was cancelled. The directors did not file the annual returns with the
       Registrar. The directors were of the opinion that the time for filing of returns
       within 60 days from the date of AGM would not apply, as AGM was cancelled.
       Has the company contravened the provisions of Companies Act, 2013? If the
       company has contravened the provisions of the Act, how will it be penalized?

14. Madurai Bakes Ltd. issued a notice for holding of its Annual General Meeting
       on 7th September, 2024. The notice was posted to the members on
       16th August, 2024. Some members of the company alleged that the company
       had not complied with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 with regard
       to the period of notice and as such the meeting was not valid. Referring to
       the provisions of the Act, decide:

       (i) Whether the meeting has been validly called?

       (ii) If there is a shortfall, state and explain by how many days does the
               notice fall short of the statutory requirement?

       (iii) Can the delay in giving notice be condoned?

15. KMN Cables Ltd. scheduled its Annual General Meeting to be held on
       15th September, 2024 at 11:00 A.M. The company has 900 members. On the
       scheduled date of AGM following persons were present by 11:30 A.M.

       1. P1, P2 & P3 shareholders
       2. P4 representing ABC Ltd.
       3. P5 representing DEF Ltd.
       4. P6 & P7 as proxies of the shareholders

               (i) Examine with reference to relevant provisions of the Companies
                       Act, 2013, whether quorum was present in the meeting.

               (ii) What will be your answer if P4 representing ABC Ltd., reached in
                       the meeting after 11:30 A.M.?

               (iii) In case lack of Quorum, discuss the provisions as applicable for an
                       adjourned meeting in terms of date, time & place.

       What happens if there is no Quorum at the adjourned meeting?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.103

16. As a matter of fact, the usual time allowed for making entries in the register
       of members or register of debenture-holders or register of other security
       holders is seven days after the Board of Directors or its committee grants its
       approval. There are certain events, on the happening of which the entries can
       be made even after seven days. Which are those events?

17. With a view to transact some urgent business, Ratna, Rimpi and Ratnesh, the
       three directors of Shilpkaar Constructions Limited are desirous of calling a
       general meeting of shareholders by giving shorter notice than 21 days' clear
       notice. The fourth director, Nilesh is of the opinion that such an action will
       attract penalty provisions since there is contravention. The paid-up share
       capital of the company is ` 30 crore divided into 3 crore shares of ` 10 each.
       Keeping in view the applicable provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, discuss
       regarding the possibility of calling a general meeting by giving shorter notice.

18. Miraj Sugar Mills Limited held its Annual General Meeting on September 15,
       2024. The meeting was presided over by Mr. Venkat, the Chairman of the
       Board of Directors of the company. On September 17, 2024, Mr. Venkat, the
       Chairman, without signing the minutes of the meeting, left India to look after
       his father who fell sick in London. Referring to the provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013, examine the manner in which the minutes of the above
       meeting are to be signed in the absence of Mr. Venkat and by whom.

19. Shikhar Cement Limited passed two resolutions by means of postal ballot.
       Keeping in view the relevant provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, you are
       required to advise the directors of the company regarding the provisions
       applicable for making entries in the minutes book including the time limit
       within which the entries must be made.

20. The paid-up share capital of Disha Home Appliances Limited is ` 8 crore
       divided into 80 lakh shares of ` 10 each. The directors of the company would
       like to know the circumstances under which the Annual Return of the
       company shall be required to be certified by a company secretary in practice.

21. Prince Auto-parts Limited, a listed company, has recently concluded its
       Annual General Meeting. As a statutory requirement, it is obligatory on its
       part to file with the jurisdictional Registrar of Companies a copy of the Report
       on its AGM.

       (i) State within how much time it is required to file the said Report.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    7.104  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(ii) In case Prince Auto-parts Limited fails to file the Report on its AGM
       within the specified time, state the penalty to which the company and
       also its every officer who is in default shall be liable for such failure.

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.  (d) No, the signing is not in order, since in case the Chairman

         is unable to sign, the report shall be signed by any two

         directors of the company, one of whom shall be the

         Managing director, if there is one and company secretary

         of the company.

2.  (d) 95% of members entitled

3.  (c) C Limited, whose preference shares (the company is having

         both equity as well as preference shares) are listed on a

         recognised stock exchange

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. Under Section 118 (5) of the Companies Act, 2013, there shall not be
       included in the Minutes of a meeting, any matter which, in the opinion of
       the Chairman of the meeting:

       (i) is or could reasonably be regarded as defamatory of any person;

       (ii) is irrelevant or immaterial to the proceeding; or

       (iii) is detrimental to the interests of the company;

       Further, under section 118(6) the chairman shall exercise absolute discretion
       in regard to the inclusion or non-inclusion of any matter in the Minutes on
       the grounds specified in sub-section (5) of section 118.

       Hence, in view of the above, the contention of Mukesh, a shareholder of
       Alpha Limited is not valid because the Chairman has absolute discretion on
       the inclusion or exclusion of any matter in the minutes for aforesaid
       reasons.

2. A Proxy is an instrument in writing executed by a shareholder authorizing
       another person to attend a meeting and to vote thereat on his behalf in his

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.105

       absence. As per the provisions of section 105 of the Companies Act, 2013,
       every shareholder who is entitled to attend and vote has a statutory right to
       appoint another person as his proxy. It is not necessary that the proxy be a
       member of the company. Further, any provision in the articles of association
       of the company requiring instrument of proxy to be lodged with the
       company more than 48 hours before a meeting shall have effect as if 48
       hours had been specified therein. The members have a right to revoke the
       proxy's authority by voting himself before the proxy has voted but once the
       proxy has voted the member cannot retract his authority.

       Where two proxy instruments by the same shareholder are lodged in such a
       manner that one is lodged before and the other after the expiry of the date
       fixed for lodging proxies, the former will be counted.

       Thus, in case of member X, the proxy Y will be permitted to vote on his
       behalf as form for appointing proxy was submitted within the permissible
       time.

       However, in the case of Member W, the proxy M (and not Proxy N) would be
       permitted to vote as the proxy authorizing N to vote was deposited in less
       than 48 hours before the meeting.

3. Under section 102 (2) (b) of the Companies Act, 2013, in the case of any
       meeting other than an Annual General Meeting, all business transacted
       thereat shall be deemed to be special business.

       Further under section 102 (1) a statement setting out the following material
       facts concerning each item of special business to be transacted at a general
       meeting, shall be annexed to the notice calling such meeting:

       (a) the nature of concern or interest, financial or otherwise, if any, in
               respect of each items, of every director and the manager, if any or
               every other key managerial personnel and relatives of such persons;
               and

       (b) any other information and facts that may enable members to
               understand the meaning, scope and implications of the items of
               business and to take decision thereon.

       Thus, the objection of the member is valid since the complete details about
       the issue of sweat equity were required to be sent with the notice of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.106  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       meeting. The notice is, therefore, cannot be said to be a valid one when the
       provisions of Section 102 of the Companies Act, 2013 are considered.

4. (i) Maintenance of the Register of Members etc.: As per section 94(1)
               of the Companies Act, 2013, the registers required to be kept and
               maintained by a company under section 88 and copies of the annual
               return filed under section 92 shall be kept at the registered office of
               the company:

               Provided that such registers or copies of return may also be kept at
               any other place in India in which more than one-tenth of the total
               number of members entered in the register of members reside, if
               approved by a special resolution passed at a general meeting of the
               company.

               So, Tulip Ltd. can also keep the registers and returns at Kolkata after
               compliance with the above provisions, provided more than one-tenth
               of the total number of members entered in the register of
               members reside in Kolkata.

        (ii) As per section 94(2) of the Companies Act, the registers and their
               indices, except when they are closed under the provisions of this Act,
               and the copies of all the returns shall be open for inspection by any
               member, debenture-holder, other security holder or beneficial owner,
               during business hours without payment of any fees and by any other
               person on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.

               Accordingly, a director Mr. Rich, who is a shareholder of the company,
               has a right to inspect the Register of Members during business hours
               without payment of any fees, as per the provisions of this section.

5. According to section 100 (2) of the Companies Act 2013, the Board of
       directors must convene a general meeting upon requisition made by the
       stipulated minimum number of members.

       As per Section 103 (2) (b) of the Companies Act, 2013, if the quorum is not
       present within half an hour from the appointed time for holding a meeting
       of the company, the meeting, if called on the requisition of members, shall
       stand cancelled. Therefore, the meeting stands cancelled and the stand
       taken by the Board of Directors to adjourn it, is not proper and valid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.107

6. Under section 102 (2) (b) of the Companies Act, 2013, in the case of any
       general meeting other than an AGM, all business transacted thereat shall be
       deemed to be special business.

       Further under section 102 (1), a statement setting out the following material
       facts concerning each item of special business to be transacted at a general
       meeting, shall be annexed to the notice calling such meeting, namely:--

       (a) the nature of concern or interest, financial or otherwise, if any, in
               respect of each items, of:

               (i) every director and the manager, if any;

               (ii) every other key managerial personnel; and

               (iii) relatives of the persons mentioned in sub-clauses (i) and (ii);

       (b) any other information and facts that may enable members to
               understand the meaning, scope and implications of the items of
               business and to take decision thereon.

       Thus, the objection of the shareholder is valid since the details of the item
       to be considered at the general meeting are not fully disclosed. The
       information about the amount is a material fact with reference to the
       proposed increase of share capital. The notice is, therefore, not a valid
       notice considering the provisions of section 102 of the Companies Act,
       2013.

7. Section 109 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for the demand of poll
       before or on the declaration of the result of the voting on any resolution on
       show of hands.

       Accordingly, section 109 (1) lays down as under:

       Before or on the declaration of the result of the voting on any resolution on
       show of hands, a poll may be ordered to be taken by the Chairman of the
       meeting on his own motion, and shall be ordered to be taken by him on a
       demand made in that behalf:-

       (a) In the case of a company having a share capital, by the members
               present in person or by proxy, where allowed, and having not less
               than one-tenth of the total voting power or holding shares on which

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.108  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               an aggregate sum of not less than five lakh rupees or such higher
               amount as may be prescribed has been paid-up; and

       (b) in the case of any other company, by any member or members
               present in person or by proxy, where allowed, and having not less
               than one tenth of the total voting power.

       Withdrawal of the demand for poll: According to section 109 (2), the
       demand for a poll may be withdrawn at any time by the persons who made
       the demand.

       Hence, on the basis on the above provisions of the Companies Act, 2013:

       (i) The chairman cannot reject the demand for poll subject to the
               provisions contained in the articles of company.

       (ii) The chairman cannot reject the request of the members for withdrawal
               of the demand for poll.

8. Under section 105 (8) of the Companies Act, 2013 every member entitled to
       vote at a meeting of the company, or on any resolution to be moved
       thereat, shall be entitled during the period beginning twenty-four hours
       before the time fixed for the commencement of the meeting and ending
       with the conclusion of the meeting, to inspect the proxies lodged, at any
       time during the business hours of the company, provided not less than
       three days' notice in writing of the intention so to inspect is given to the
       company.

       In the given case, Surya has given a proper notice. Therefore, validity of
       notice cannot be denied.

       However, such inspection can be undertaken only during the period
       beginning 24 hours before the time fixed for the commencement of the
       meeting and ending with the conclusion of the meeting.

       In view of above provision, Surya can undertake the inspection only during
       the above-mentioned period and not two days prior to the meeting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.109

9. Rule 8 of the Companies (Significant Beneficial Owners) Rules, 201824 states
       that the `SBO' Rules shall not be made applicable to the extent the shares of
       the Reporting Company are held by following entities:

       (a) the Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority [constituted
               under section 125 (5)];

       (b) its holding reporting company provided that the details of such
               holding reporting company shall be reported in Form No. BEN-2;

       (c) the Central Government, State Government or any local authority;

       (d) (i) a reporting company; or

                (ii) a body corporate; or

                (iii) an entity,

               controlled wholly or partly by the Central Government and/ or State
               Government(s);

       (e) Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) registered Investment
               Vehicles such as mutual funds, alternative investment funds (AIFs),
               Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) and Infrastructure Investment
               Trusts (InVITs) regulated by SEBI;

       (f) Investment Vehicles regulated by Reserve Bank of India, or Insurance
               Regulatory and Development Authority of India, or Pension Fund
               Regulatory and Development Authority.

10. According to Section 96 of the Companies Act, 2013, every company shall
       be required to hold its first Annual General Meeting within a period of 9
       months from the date of closing of its first financial year.

       The first financial year of Infotech Ltd is for the period 1st April 2022 to 31st
       March 2023, the first Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the company should
       be held on or before 31st December, 2023.

       The section further provides that the Registrar may, for any special reason,
       extend the time within which any Annual General Meeting, other than the

24 As amended by the Companies (Significant Beneficial Owners) Amendment Rules, 2019, w.e.f.
8-2-2019.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.110  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       first Annual General Meeting, shall be held, by a period not exceeding three
       months.

       Thus, the first AGM of Infotech Ltd. should have been held on or before 31st
       December, 2023. Further, in case of first AGM, the Registrar of Companies does
       not have the power to grant extension of any time limit.

11. According to section 103 of the Companies Act, 2013, unless the articles of
       the company provide for a larger number in case of a public company, five
       members personally present if the number of members as on the date of
       meeting is not more than one thousand, shall be the quorum.

       In this case the quorum for holding a general meeting is 7 members to be
       personally present (higher of 5 or 7). For the purpose of quorum, only those
       members are counted who are entitled to vote on resolution proposed to
       be passed in the meeting.

       Again, only members present in person and not by proxy are to be counted.
       Hence, proxies whether they are members or not will have to be excluded
       for the purpose of quorum.

       If a company is a member of another company, it may authorize a person by
       resolution to act as its representative at a meeting of the latter company,
       then such a person shall be deemed to be a member present in person and
       counted for the purpose of quorum. Where two or more companies which
       are members of another company, appoint a single person as their
       representative then each such company will be counted as quorum at a
       meeting of the latter company.

       Further, the President of India or Governor of a State, if he is a member of a
       company, may appoint such a person as he thinks fit, to act as his
       representative at any meeting of the company. A person so appointed shall
       be deemed to be a member of such a company and thus considered as
       member personally present.

       In view of the above there are only three members personally present.

       `A' will be included for the purpose of quorum. B & C have to be excluded
       for the purpose of quorum because they represent the preference shares
       and since the agenda being the appointment of Managing Director, their
       rights cannot be said to be directly affected and therefore, they shall not

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.111

       have voting rights. D will have two votes for the purpose of quorum as he
       represents two companies `Y Ltd.' and `Z Ltd.' E, F, G and H are not to be
       included as they are not members but proxies representing the members.

       Thus, it can be said that the requirement of quorum has not been met and
       the composition shall not constitute a valid quorum for the meeting.

12. A proxy is an instrument in writing executed by a shareholder authorising
       another person to attend a meeting and to vote thereat on his behalf in his
       absence. The term also applies to the person so appointed and in such case
       a proxy is a person appointed by a member of a company, to attend the
       general meeting of the company and vote thereat on his behalf.

       The various provisions relating to the appointment of a proxy are contained
       in section 105 of the Companies Act, 2013. They are as under:

       1. Under section 105 (1) any member of a company entitled to attend
               and vote at a meeting of the company shall be entitled to appoint
               another person as a proxy to attend and vote at the meeting on his
               behalf.

       2. A proxy shall not have the right to speak at such meeting and shall
               not be entitled to vote except on a poll. This means that a proxy
               cannot vote on a resolution by show of hands.

       3. The Central Government may prescribe a class or classes of companies
               whose members shall not be entitled to appoint another person as a
               proxy.

       4. Under section 105 (6) the instrument appointing a proxy shall be in
               writing; and be signed by the appointer or his attorney duly
               authorised in writing or, if the appointer is a body corporate, be under
               its seal or be signed by an officer or an attorney duly authorised by it.

       5. Under section 105 (7) an instrument appointing a proxy, if in the form
               as may be prescribed, shall not be questioned on the ground that it
               fails to comply with any special requirements specified for such
               instrument by the articles of a company.

13. According to section 92(4) of the Companies Act, 2013, every company shall
       file with the Registrar a copy of the annual return, within sixty days from the
       date on which the annual general meeting is held or where no annual

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.112  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       general meeting is held in any year within sixty days from the date on which
       the annual general meeting should have been held together with the
       statement specifying the reasons for not holding the annual general
       meeting.

       Sub-section (5) of Section 92 also states that if any company fails to file its
       annual return under sub-section (4), before the expiry of the period
       specified therein, such company and its every officer who is in default shall
       be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing
       failure, with further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day during
       which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees in
       case of a company and fifty thousand rupees in case of an officer who is in
       default.

       In the instant case, the opinion of the directors that since the AGM was
       cancelled, the provisions requiring the company to file annual returns within
       60 days from the date of AGM would not apply, is not correct.

       In the above case, the annual general meeting of Super Mart Limited should
       have been held within a period of six months, from the date of closing of
       the financial year but it did not take place. Thus, the company has
       contravened the provisions of section 92 of the Companies Act, 2013 for not
       filing the annual return and shall attract the penal provisions along with
       every officer of the company who is in default as specified in Section 92 (5)
       of the Act.

14. According to section 101(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, a general meeting
       of a company may be called by giving not less than clear twenty-one days'
       notice either in writing or through electronic mode in such manner as may
       be prescribed.

       Also, it is to be noted that 21 clear days mean that the date on which notice
       is served and the date of meeting are excluded for sending the notice.

       Further, Rule 35(6) of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014, provides
       that in case of delivery by post, such service shall be deemed to have been
       effected- in the case of a notice of a meeting, at the expiration of forty eight
       hours after the letter containing the same is posted.

       Hence, in the given question:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                      7.113

       (i) A 21 days' clear notice must be given. In the given question, only 19
               clear days' notice is served (after excluding 48 hours from the time of
               its posting and the day of sending and date of meeting). Therefore,
               the meeting was not validly called.

       (ii) As explained in (i) above, notice falls short by 2 days.

       (iii) The Companies Act, 2013 does not provide anything specific
               regarding the condonation of delay in giving of notice. Hence, the
               delay in giving the notice calling the meeting cannot be condoned.

15. According to section 103 of the Companies Act, 2013, unless the articles of
       the company provide for a larger number, the quorum for the meeting of a
       Public Limited Company shall be 5 members personally present, if number
       of members is not more than 1000.

       (i) (1) P1, P2 and P3 will be counted as three members.

                (2) If a company is a member of another company, it may authorize
                       a person by resolution to act as its representative at a meeting
                       of the latter company, then such a person shall be deemed to be
                       a member present in person and counted for the purpose of
                       quorum. Hence, P4 and P5 representing ABC Ltd. and DEF Ltd.
                       respectively will be counted as two members.

                (3) Only members present in person and not by proxy are to be
                       counted. Hence, proxies whether they are members or not will
                       have to be excluded for the purposes of quorum. Thus, P6 and
                       P7 shall not be counted as constituting quorum.

                       In the light of the provision of the Act and the facts of the
                       question, it can be concluded that the quorum for Annual
                       General Meeting of KMN Cables Ltd. is 5 members personally
                       present. Total 5 members (P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5) were present.
                       Hence, the requirement of quorum is fulfilled.

       (ii) The section further states that, if the required quorum is not present
               within half an hour, the meeting shall stand adjourned for the next
               week at the same time and place or such other time and place as
               decided by the Board of Directors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.114  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               Since, P4 is an essential part for meeting the requirement of quorum
               and he reaches after 11:30 A.M. (i.e. after half an hour from the
               starting time of the meeting), the meeting will be adjourned as
               provided above.

       (iii) In case of lack of quorum, the meeting will be adjourned as provided
               in section 103 of the Companies Act, 2013.

               In case of the adjourned meeting or change of day, time or place of
               meeting, the company shall give not less than 3 days' notice to the
               members either individually or by publishing an advertisement in the
               newspaper.

       (iv) Where quorum is not present in the adjourned meeting also within
               half an hour, then the members present shall form the quorum.

16. In this respect Rules 5 (7) and 5 (8) of the Companies (Management and
       Administration) Rules, 2014 are relevant.

       Rule 5 (7) specifies that in case of companies whose securities are listed on
       a stock exchange in or outside India, the particulars of any pledge, charge,
       lien or hypothecation created by the promoters in respect of any securities
       of the company held by the promoter including the names of
       pledgee/pawnee and any revocation therein shall be entered in the register
       within fifteen days from such an event.

       According to Rule 5 (8), if promoters of any listed company, which has
       formed a joint venture company with another company, have pledged or
       hypothecated or created charge or lien in respect of any security of the
       listed company in connection with such joint venture company, the
       particulars of such pledge, hypothecation, charge and lien shall be entered
       in the register members of the listed company within fifteen days from such
       an event.

       Thus, in the above two cases, it is permitted for the listed companies to
       make entries relating to pledge, charge, lien or hypothecation in the
       registers within fifteen days from the happening of such an event.

17. Normally, general meetings are to be called by giving at least 21 clear days'
       notice as required by Section 101 (1) of the Companies Act, 2013.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  7.115

       As an exception, first proviso to Section 101 (1) states that a general meeting
       may be called after giving shorter notice than that specified in sub-section (1)
       of Section 101, if consent, in writing or by electronic mode, is accorded
       thereto--

       (i) in the case of an annual general meeting, by not less than ninety-five
               per cent. of the members entitled to vote thereat; and

       (ii) in the case of any other general meeting, by members of the
               company--

               (a) holding, if the company has a share capital, majority in number of
                       members entitled to vote and who represent not less than ninety-
                       five per cent. of such part of the paid-up share capital of the
                       company as gives a right to vote at the meeting; or

               (b) having, if the company has no share capital, not less than ninety-
                       five per cent. of the total voting power exercisable at that
                       meeting.

       Second proviso to Section 101 (1) clarifies that where any member of a
       company is entitled to vote only on some resolution or resolutions to be
       moved at a meeting and not on the others, those members shall be taken
       into account for the purposes of sub section (1) of section 101 in respect of
       the former resolution or resolutions and not in respect of the latter.

       In view of the above provisions, Shilpkaar Constructions Limited is permitted
       to call the requisite general meeting by giving a shorter notice. However, the
       members holding at least ninety-five per cent of the paid-up share capital of
       the company which gives them a right to vote at the meeting must consent
       to the shorter notice.

       Hence, the opinion of Nilesh that there shall be contravention of relevant
       provisions attracting penalty if a general meeting is called at shorter notice
       than usually required is not correct.

18. Section 118 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that every company shall
       prepare, sign and keep minutes of proceedings of every general meeting,
       including the meeting called by the requisitionists and all proceedings of
       meeting of any class of shareholders or creditors or Board of Directors or
       committee of the Board and also resolution passed by postal ballot within

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.116  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       thirty days of the conclusion of every such meeting concerned. Minutes kept
       shall be evidence of the proceedings recorded in a meeting.

       By virtue of Rule 25 of the Companies (Management and Administration )
       Rules 2014 read with section 118 of the Companies Act, 2013 each page of
       every such book shall be initialled or signed and the last page of the record
       of proceedings of each meeting or each report in such books shall be dated
       and signed by, in the case of minutes of proceedings of a general meeting,
       by the Chairman of the same meeting within the aforesaid period of thirty
       days or in the event of the death or inability of that Chairman within that
       period, by a director duly authorized by the Board for the purpose.

       Therefore, the minutes of the meeting referred to in the case given above
       can be signed in the absence of Mr Venkat, by any other director also who
       is authorized by the Board.

19. Section 118 of the Companies Act, 2013 requires a company to make entries
       of resolutions passed by means of postal ballot in the minutes book.

       Rule 25 (1) (b) (ii) of the Companies (Management and Administration)
       Rules, 2014 states that in case of every resolution passed by postal ballot, a
       brief report on the postal ballot conducted including the resolution
       proposed, the result of the voting thereon and the summary of the
       scrutinizer's report shall be entered in the minutes book of general
       meetings along with the date of such entry within thirty days from the date
       of passing of resolution.

       Accordingly, the directors of Shikhar Cement Limited are advised to keep
       following points under consideration while entering resolutions passed by
       means of postal ballot in the minutes book of general meetings:

       (i) there should be entered a brief report on the postal ballot conducted
               including the resolution proposed.

       (ii) there should be entered the result of the voting made by the
               shareholders in respect of resolution.

       (iii) there should be entered the summary of the scrutinizer's report.

       (iv) there should be entered the date of making entry.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION         7.117

       Further, the directors must ensure that the entries in respect of resolutions
       are made within thirty days from the date of passing of resolution by means
       of postal ballot.

20. In respect of certification of Annual Return by a company secretary in
       practice, the directors of Disha Home Appliances Limited are advised to
       refer Section 92 (2) of the Companies Act, 2013 and also Rule 11 (2) of the
       Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014 which state that
       the Annual Returns of following companies shall be certified by a company
       secretary in practice:

       (i) a listed company; or

       (ii) a company having paid-up share capital of ` 10 crore or more or
               turnover of ` 50 crore or more.

       Accordingly, if Disha Home Appliances Limited gets listed or in case its
       paid-up share capital is increased to ` 10 crore or more or its turnover
       becomes ` 50 crore or more, it shall be required to get its Annual Return
       certified by a company secretary in practice. The certificate given by the
       company secretary in practice shall be in Form No. MGT-8. The certificate,
       inter-alia, shall state that the Annual Return discloses the facts correctly and
       adequately and that the company has complied with all the provisions of
       the Companies Act, 2013.

21. (i)      In terms of Section 121 (2) of the Companies Act, 2013, Prince Auto-
       (ii)  parts Limited is required to file with the jurisdictional Registrar of
             Companies a copy of the Report maximum within thirty days of the
             conclusion of its Annual General Meeting.

             In terms of Section 121 (3) of the Companies Act, 2013, every listed
             company, which fails to file with the jurisdictional Registrar of
             Companies a copy of the Report on its Annual General Meeting within
             the specified time limit, shall be liable to the following penalty:

             · Company: ` one lakh and in case of continuing failure, with a
                    further penalty of ` five hundred for each day after the first
                    during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of
                    ` five lakh.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.118  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       · Every officer who is in default: Minimum ` twenty-five
               thousand and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty
               of ` five hundred for each day after the first during which such
               failure continues subject to a maximum of ` one lakh.

Accordingly, if Prince Auto-parts Limited fails to file a copy of the report on
its Annual General Meeting within the specified time limit of thirty days, it
shall be liable to the above stated penalty which may go maximum up to `
five lakh in case of continuing default. In addition, its every officer who is in
default shall also liable to the penalty maximum of which will be ` one lakh
in case of continuing failure.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
