CHAPTER  8

DECLARATION AND
PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
 Comprehend the legal provisions relating to declaration and

      payment of dividend
 Identify about the conditions which need to be fulfilled before

      declaring dividend out of accumulated reserves.
 Appreciate the manner in which unpaid and unclaimed

      dividend is to be dealt with.
 Identify the nature and framework of the Investor Education

      and Protection Fund (IEPF).
 Appreciate the consequences for failure to distribute

      dividend.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               8.2  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

                                   Dividend

Meaning of       Declaration of     Unpaid/       IEPF          Punishment
 Dividend      Dividend [Sec. 123  Unclaime    [Sec. 125]       for failure to
[Sec. 2(35]
                  & Companies           d         Establisment   distribute
  Types of      (Declaration and   Dividend          of Fund      dividend
 Dividend                          [Sec. 124]                     within 30
                   Payment of                                    days [Sec.
      Interim   Dividend) Rules,
     Dividend                                                        127]
                       2014]
        Final                                    Credits to     Exemptions
     Dividend        Current                     the Fund
                        Year
                      profits                        and
                                               Utilization of
                    Past Year
                      profits                       Fund

                     Reserves

     1. MEANING OF DIVIDEND

Definition
Section 2(35) of the Companies Act, 2013, while defining the term dividend simply
states that "dividend" includes any interim dividend. In common parlance,
"Dividend" implies a distribution of any sums to members out of profits and
wherever permitted out of free reserves available for the purpose.
Dividend is the shareholders return on their investment / capital in the company.
Dividend is part of the distributable profits which has been paid out to them. In
simple words, it is a distribution of profits i.e. a portion of profits earned and
allocated as payable to the shareholders whenever declared.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND  8.3

The company in general meeting may declare dividends, but no dividend shall
exceed the amount recommended by the Board. (Clause 80 of Table F in Schedule I)

Dividend is recommended by Board of Directors in the Board's Report1 and
approved by Shareholders at the Annual General Meeting. Dividend is not a
liability unless it is declared by the shareholders at a validly constituted general
meeting by passing an ordinary resolution2 at the rates recommended by the
Board or such lower rates as they may decide.

Declaration of dividend by the company at a rate higher than the rate
recommended by the Board is not permitted.

Dividend is Declared as a proportion of Nominal or Face Value of a share.

Example 1: AB Ltd. has issued equity shares having face value of ` 10 per share.
The shares are currently quoting on the NSE at ` 250/- per share. The company at
its AGM held on 27.7.24 has declared a dividend of 20%. Mr. Shekar owns 1000
shares which he purchased at ` 300/- per share. What is the amount of dividend
he will receive?

The dividend is to be calculated on Face Value i.e. ` 10/-. So dividend per share is
20% of ` 10/- = ` 2/- per share. So, Mr. Shekar will receive ` 2 * 1000 shares =
` 2000/-.

Example 2: The shareholders at an annual general meeting unanimously passed a
resolution for payment of dividend at a rate higher than that recommended by
the directors. Discuss the validity of the resolution.

Articles of Association companies usually contain provisions with regard to
declaration of dividend on the pattern of regulations 80 to 85 of Table F to
Schedule I of the Companies Act, 2013. Under regulation 80, although the power
to declare a dividend vests with the shareholders however under no
circumstances they can declare dividend exceeding the amount recommended by
the Board of Directors.

1 As per Section 134 (3) (k).
2 As per section 102 (2) declaration of any dividend at the AGM is an ordinary business
requiring ordinary resolution. At any other general meeting it will be special business.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.4               CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

     2. TYPES OF DIVIDEND

I. Classification based on time i.e. when declared

                                                   Dividend

Interim Dividend                                             Final Dividend

Interim Dividend

Section 123 (3) and also section 123 (4) contain provisions regarding interim
dividend. Following points are noteworthy:

 Interim dividend may be declared by the Board of Directors at any time
       during the period from closure of financial year till holding of the annual
       general meeting.

       The declaration of interim dividend is done out of profits before the final
       adoption of the accounts by the shareholders and therefore, interim
       dividend is said to be declared and paid between two AGMs.

 The sources for declaring interim dividend include:

       · Surplus in the profit and loss account; or

       · Profits of the financial year in which such dividend is sought to be
               declared; or

       · Profits generated in the financial year till the quarter preceding the
               date of declaration of the interim dividend.

 If the company has incurred loss during the current financial year up to the
       end of the quarter immediately preceding the date of declaration of interim
       dividend, such interim dividend shall not be declared at a rate higher than
       the average (rate of) dividend declared by the company during the
       immediately preceding three financial years.

       Example 3: If a company declared dividend at the rate of 16% during the
       immediately preceding three financial years, then in case the company

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                 8.5

incurs loss in the current financial year, it is permitted to declare interim
dividend at a rate which is not higher than 16%.

 The amount of the dividend, including interim dividend, shall be deposited
       in a separate account maintained with a scheduled bank within five days
       from the date of declaration.

 All provisions which are applicable to the payment of dividend shall also
       apply in case of interim dividend.

Final Dividend

 When the dividend is declared at the Annual General Meeting of the
       company, it is known as `final dividend'.

 The rate of dividend recommended by the Board cannot be increased by the
       members.

The table given below provides a quick summary of the above concepts of Interim
Dividend and Final Dividend.

  BASIS FOR     INTERIM DIVIDEND                    FINAL DIVIDEND
COMPARISON

Definition      Interim dividend is declared        Final dividend is the
                and paid during an accounting       dividend recommended by
                year, i.e. before the finalization  the board of directors, and
                of accounts for the year.           approved by shareholders
                                                    at the company's Annual
                                                    General Meeting, after the
                                                    close of financial year.

Announcement Announced by Board of Recommended by Board of

                Directors.                          Directors and approved by

                                                    shareholders.

Time            of Before preparation of financial After preparation of

Declaration     statements.                         financial statements.

Revocation      It can be revoked with the It cannot be revoked.
                consent of all shareholders.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        8.6          CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

II. Classification based on Nature of Shares does not require any
       specific provision in the articles.

             Preference                            Cumulative      Dividend
               Shares                              Preference    accumulates
                                                               unless it is paid
Shares                                                Shares
                                                                     in full
                                                       Non-
                                                   cumulative    No arrears of
                                                   Preference     dividend in
                                                               future is payable
                                                      Shares

             Equity                                 Dividend dependent on dividend
             Shares                                policy and the availability of profits

                                                        after satisfying the rights of
                                                         preference shareholders.

Shares can be classified into two categories i.e. preference shares and equity shares.
The manner of payment of dividend is dependent upon the nature of shares.

(i) Preference Shares: According to Section 43 of the Companies Act, 2013,
       shareholders holding preference shares are assured of a preferential
       dividend at a fixed rate during the life of the company.

       Preference dividend unless otherwise agreed as cumulative in nature need
       not be paid every year i.e. a company may decide not to declare any
       dividend where there is deficiency of profits.

       Classification of preference shares on the basis of payment of dividend is as
       follows:

       (a) Cumulative Preference Shares: A cumulative preference share is one
               in respect of which dividend gets accumulated and any arrears of such
               dividend arising due to insufficiency of profits during the current year
               is payable from the profits earned in the later years. Until and unless
               dividend on cumulative preference shares is paid in full, including
               arrears, if any, no dividend is payable on equity shares.

       (b) Non-cumulative Preference Shares: A non-cumulative preference
               share is one where the dividend is payable only in a year of profit.
               There is no accumulation of profit as in the case of cumulative
               preference shares. In case no dividend is declared in a year due to any
               reason, the right to receive such dividend for that year lapses and the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND  8.7

               holder of such a share is not entitled to be paid arrears of dividend
               out of future year profits.

(ii) Equity Shares: Equity shares are those shares, which are not preference
       shares. They do not enjoy any preferential rights in the matter of payment
       of dividend or repayment of capital. The rate of dividend on equity shares is
       recommended by the Board of Directors and may vary from year to year.
       Rate of dividend depends upon the dividend policy and the availability of
       profits after satisfying the rights of preference shareholders.

     3. PROVISIONS REGARDING DECLARATION
          AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND

A. Sources for Declaration of Dividend

According to Section 123 (1), the dividend for any financial year shall be declared
or paid from the following sources:

(a) Profits of the current financial year- Profits arrived at after providing for
       depreciation in accordance with Schedule II3.

(b) Profits of any previous financial year or years- Profits of any previous
       financial year(s) arrived at after providing for depreciation in accordance
       with Schedule II and remaining undistributed i.e. credit balance in profit and
       loss account and free reserves. It is to be noted that only free reserves4 and
       no other reserves are to be used for declaration or payment of dividend5.

(c) Both (a) and (b).

3 As per Section 123 (2).
4 Section 2 (43) defines the term `free reserves' to mean such reserves which, as per the latest
audited balance sheet of a company, are available for distribution as dividend. However,
following items shall not be treated as free reserves:
(a) any amount representing unrealised gains, notional gains or revaluation of assets,

     whether shown as a reserve or otherwise; or
(b) any change in carrying amount of an asset or of a liability recognised in equity, including

     surplus in profit and loss account on measurement of the asset or the liability at fair
     value.
5 As per Third Proviso to Section 123 (1).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(d) Provision of money by the Government- Money provided by the Central
       Government or a State Government for the payment of dividend by the
       company in pursuance of a guarantee given by that Government.

       Note 1: Before declaration of any dividend, carried over previous losses and
       depreciation not provided in previous year or years are required to be set
       off against profit of the company for the current year6.

       Note 2: In computing profits any amount representing unrealised gains,
       notional gains or revaluation of assets and any change in carrying amount
       of an asset or of a liability on measurement of the asset or the liability at
       fair value shall be excluded7.

       Note 3: Capital profits are not same as distributable profits because they
       are not earned in the normal course of business; and therefore, normally not
       available for distribution as dividend.

       Need for providing for depreciation out of profits before declaring
       dividend

       Dividend is an apportionment from revenue profits. Therefore, dividend
       should never be declared out of capital. This is also the reason for
       prohibition on issue of shares at a discount which you studied in the topic
       Share Capital and Debentures.

       "Depreciation" is a notional estimate of the reduction in the value of an
       asset due to

       i. wear and tear,

       ii. efflux of time,

       iii. improvements in technology etc.

       If depreciation is not provided for there will be two consequences:

       i. The value of the asset will be overstated in Balance Sheet

       ii. The profits of the current year will be overstated.

6 As per Fourth Proviso to Section 123 (1).
7 As per Proviso to Section 123 (1) (a).

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND  8.9

       Let us take a hypothetical case where a company declares all the profits
       earned during any year as dividend.

       At the time of winding up of the company the value of assets appearing in
       the Balance-sheet would appear to be sufficient to repay the capital of the
       shareholders but the actual realizable value thereof will be a paltry sum
       which may not be sufficient even to meet the expenses of winding up.

       This is because the company has failed to retain the amount of wear and
       tear in the value of the asset by way of provision for depreciation. In a way
       the company would have declared dividend out of capital, which is
       prohibited.

       Hence the law mandates provision for depreciation out of profits before
       declaration of dividend.

       Example 4: Shreyas Mechanics Limited owns a plot of land which was
       purchased long before. As the property rates are going up, it is decided to
       revalue the plot at fair value which is moderately ten times the original
       price, thus resulting in a revaluation profit of ` 20,00,000. The Board of
       Directors is keen to utilize this ` 20,00,000 along with free reserves of
       ` 24,00,000 for declaration of dividend at the forthcoming Annual General
       Meeting (AGM) to be held on 28th September, 2023. But according to
       Proviso to Section 123(1)(a), the amount of ` 20,00,000 cannot be
       considered as it does not form part of Free Reserves as the same cannot be
       utilized towards declaration of dividend.

B. Transfer to Reserves

Transfer of profits to reserves for any financial year has been left to the discretion of
the company. Therefore, a company is free to transfer any portion of its profit to
reserves as it may deem fit. It may also decide not to transfer any amount to reserves.

Illustration 1: For the current year, Alma Watches Limited proposes to transfer
more than 10% of its profits to the reserves before declaration of dividend at the
rate of 12%. Can the company do so?

Answer: The amount to be transferred to reserves out of profits for any financial
year before the declaration of dividend has been left to the discretion of the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

company. Therefore, Alma Watches Limited is free to transfer any part of its
profits to reserves as it may deem fit.

Illustration 2: Brix Shipyards Limited has earned a profit of ` 1,000 crore for the
financial year 2023-24. It has proposed a dividend @ 8.75%. However, it does not
intend to transfer any amount to the reserves out of the profits earned. Can the
company do so?

Answer: The amount to be transferred to reserves out of profits for any financial
year has been left to the discretion of the company. The company is free to
transfer any part of its profits to reserves as it may deem fit or it may even not
transfer any profits to reserve if it is deemed appropriate before the declaration
of dividend. Thus, Brix Shipyards Limited is justified in its action if it does not
transfer any amount of profits to the reserves.

C. Declaration of Dividend when there is inadequacy or Absence of
       Profits (Second Proviso to Sec. 123)

Where in any year there are no adequate profits for declaring dividend, the
company may declare dividend out of the accumulated profits earned by it in
previous years and transferred by it to the free reserves only in accordance with
the procedure laid down in Rule 3 of the Companies (Declaration and Payment of
Dividend) Rules, 2014.

Free Reserves8 means such reserves which, as per the latest audited balance sheet
of a company, are available for distribution as dividend:

The following shall not be treated as free reserves;

Any amount representing unrealized gains, notional gains or revaluation of assets,
whether shown as a reserve or otherwise, or

Any change in carrying amount of an asset or of a liability recognized in equity,
including surplus in profit and loss account on measurement of the asset or the
liability at fair value.

Under Rule 3 such declaration shall be subject to the following conditions:

8 Section 2 (43)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.11

CONDITION I
The rate of dividend declared shall not exceed the average of the rates at which
dividend was declared by the company in the immediately preceding three years.

  Rate of Dividend  (RD1 +RD2 + RD3)/3

  Where, RD1, RD2, RD3 are rates at which dividend was declared by the company in
  the immediately preceding three years.

However, this condition shall not apply if the company has not declared any
dividend in each of the three preceding financial year.

CONDITION II

The total amount to be drawn from such accumulated profits shall not exceed 10% of
its paid-up share capital and free reserves as appearing in the latest audited financial
statement. In other words:

Total amount that can be drawn from                10% of (paid up
accumulated profits                                share capital + free reserves)

CONDITION III

The amount so drawn shall first be utilised to set off the losses incurred in the
financial year in which dividend is declared and only thereafter, any dividend in
respect of equity shares shall be declared.

CONDITION IV

The balance of reserves after such withdrawal shall not fall below 15% of its paid up
share capital as appearing in the latest audited financial statement.

Free Reserves ­ Amount of withdrawal               >= 15 % of paid up share capital

It may be noted that all the above three conditions have to be satisfied.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               8.12               CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

The conditions prescribed by Rule 3 are not applicable to a Government company
in which the entire paid up share capital is held by the Central Government, or by
any State Government or Governments or by the Central Government and one or
more State Governments (vide Notification No. 463 (E), dated 05-06-2015).

Illustration 3: Capricorn Industries Limited has a paid-up capital of ` 200 lakh and
accumulated Reserves of ` 240 lakh. Loss for the year ending 31st March 2024 is
` 30 lakh. Dividend was declared at the following rates during the three years

immediately preceding.

                     Year 1                        9%

                     Year 2                        10%

                     Year 3                        12%

What is the maximum rate at which the company can declare dividend for the current
year?

Answer: In the given case, Capricorn Industries Limited has not made adequate
profits during the current year ending on 31st March, 2024, but it still wants to
declare dividend. Let us apply the conditions:

Condition I:
Average rate = 9 +10 +12 =10.33%

                            3

Therefore, the rate of dividend shall not exceed 10.33%.

i.e. 10.3% of Paid up Capital i.e. ` 200 lakh = ` 20.6 lakh

Condition II:

Paid-up capital + Free reserves                    = ` (200+240) lakh

(Assuming all reserves are free)                             ` 440 lakh

10% thereof                                        =         ` 44 lakh

Less: loss for the year [Condition III]            =         ` 30 lakh

Amount available                                   =         ` 14 lakh

Hence, the quantum of dividend is further restricted to ` 14 lakh.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.13

Condition IV:

Amount of reserves available after adjustment of current year loss = ` 210 lakh

Proposed withdrawal declaration of dividend              ` 14 lakh

Balance of Reserves                                      ` 196 lakh

This is more than 15% of paid-up capital (i.e 15% of ` 200 lakh) i.e. ` 30 lakh.

Thus, the company can declare a dividend of ` 14 lakh i.e. at a rate of 7% on its paid-
up capital of ` 200 lakh.

Illustration 4: Shipra Sugar Mills Limited has been regularly declaring dividend at the
rate of 20% on its equity shares for the past 3 years. However, the company has not
made adequate profits during the current year ending on 31st March, 2024, but it has
got adequate free reserves which can be utilized for maintaining the rate of dividend at
20%.

Advise the company as to how it should proceed in the matter if it wants to declare
dividend at the rate of 20% for the year 2023-24, as per the provisions of the
Companies Act, 2013.

Answer: The company can declare a dividend out of its Accumulated Free Reserves
subject to satisfaction of the following conditions:

· The rate of dividend declared shall not exceed the average of the rates at
       which dividend was declared by the company in the immediately preceding
       three years.

However, this condition shall not apply if the company has not declared any
dividend in each of the three preceding financial year.

· The total amount to be drawn from free reserves shall not exceed 10% of its
       paid-up share capital and free reserves as per the latest audited financial
       statement.

· The amount so drawn shall first be utilised to set off the losses incurred in
       the current financial year and only thereafter, dividend at 20% shall be
       declared.

· After such withdrawal from free reserves, the residual reserves shall not fall
       below 15% of its paid-up share capital as per the latest audited financial
       statement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

The company is advised to get the desired dividend recommended by the Board of
Directors and propose the same for the approval of the members at the ensuing
Annual General Meeting as the authority to declare dividend lies with the members
of the company.

D. Depositing of Amount of Dividend

In terms of section 123(4), the amount of the dividend (including
interim dividend), shall be deposited in a separate account maintained
with a scheduled bank. This is to be done within 5 days from the date
of declaration of dividend9.

Example 5: The authorised and paid-up share capital of Avantika Ayurvedic
Products Limited is ` 50 lakh divided into 5,00,000 equity shares of ` 10 each. At
its Annual General Meeting (AGM) held on 24th September, 2024, the company
declared a dividend of ` 2 per share by passing an ordinary resolution. The
amount of dividend must be deposited in a scheduled bank in a separate account
latest by 29th September, 2024.

E. Payment of Dividend

Section 123(5) contains provisions regarding payment of dividend. These are
stated as under:

(a) Dividend shall be payable only to the registered shareholder or to his
       order or to his banker.

       In case a shareholder informs the company to pay dividend to a particular
       banker and if the payment is so made by the company, then it shall be
       deemed to be made to the shareholder himself.

       A purchaser of shares whose name is not entered in the Register of
       Members cannot claim payment of dividend to him though he might have
       made full payment to the seller of shares. In this regard we will, later in this
       chapter, see Section 126 which provides for keeping of dividend etc., in

9 In terms of Notification No. 463 (E), dated 05-06-2015, this requirement shall not apply
to a Government Company in which the entire paid up share capital is held by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or Governments or by the Central Government
and one or more State Governments or by one or more Government Company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.15

       abeyance pending registration of transfer of shares, unless the registered
       holder has authorized the company to pay the dividend to the purchaser.

       Illustration 5: The Directors of East West Limited proposed dividend at 15% on
       equity shares for the financial year 2023-2024. The company announced 7th
       September 2024 as the record date for payment of dividend. The dividend was
       approved in the Annual General Meeting held on 3rd September 2024.

       Mr. Binoy was the holder of 2000 equity of shares since 31st March, 2018, but he
       transferred the shares to Mr. Mohan in 2024, whose name has been entered in
       the register of members on 18th June, 2024. Who will be entitled to the above
       dividend?

       Answer: According to section 123, dividend shall be paid by a company
       only to the registered shareholder of such share.

       Record date is the date announced by the company for determining
       entitlement to dividend. All those persons whose name is included in the
       register of members on that date shall be entitled to dividend.

       In the instant case, on the date announced by the company as the record
       date, Mr. Mohan's name is present in the register of members (i.e. Mr.
       Binoy's name is NOT present therein). Therefore, the dividend should be
       paid to Mr. Mohan who is the registered shareholder on the record date.

       Note: In terms of section 51, a company may, if so authorised by its articles,
       pay dividend in proportion to the amount paid-up on each share. Suppose,
       some of the shareholders have paid only ` 5 (face value ` 10) on each share
       held by them. In case of declaration of dividend at the rate of ` 5 per share,
       the company, if authorised by its articles, shall be justified in paying
       dividend of ` 2.50 per share in respect of such partly paid shares.

(b) Dividends are payable in cash and not in kind. Dividends
       that are payable to the shareholders in cash may also be
       paid by cheque or dividend warrant or through any
       electronic mode.

       Section 127 requires that the declared dividend must be paid to the entitled
       shareholders within the prescribed time limit of thirty days from the date of
       declaration of dividend. In case dividend is paid by issuing dividend

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.16            CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       warrants, such warrants must be posted at the registered addresses within
       the prescribed time.

       Note: Dividends shall be paid only in cash. The exception to this is the
       capitalization of profits or reserves of a company for the purpose of issuing
       fully paid-up bonus shares or paying up any amount for the time being
       unpaid on any shares held by the members of the company10.

       But you may note that while Declaration of dividend does not affect the
       company's power to issue fully paid up bonus shares, such shares cannot be
       issued in lieu of dividend.

(c) Applicability of Section 123 (5) to Nidhis: In terms of Notification No. GSR
       465 (E), dated 05-06-2015, this sub-section shall apply to the Nidhis, subject
       to the modification that any dividend payable in cash may be paid by
       crediting the same to the account of the member, if the dividend is not
       claimed within 30 days from the date of declaration of the dividend.

Chart depicts the mode of payment and recipient of dividend

                                 Payment of dividend

Payable in      Payable to                         Nidhis

      Cash        the registered                   any dividend payable in cash may be
    cheque      shareholder of the                    paid by crediting the same to the
                                                        account of the member, if the
   warrant            share, or
                                                   dividend is not claimed within 30 days
any electronic   to his order,                       from the date of declaration of the
     mode              or                                             dividend.

                to his banker

F. Prohibition on Declaration of Dividend
In the following cases declaration and payment of dividend is prohibited.

10 First Proviso to Section 123 (5)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.17

(i) Prohibition in case of any Defaulting
       Company: 11 A company which fails to
       comply with the provisions of section 73
       (Prohibition on acceptance of deposits from
       public) and section 74 (Repayment of
       deposits, etc., accepted before the
       commencement of this Act of 2013) shall not,
       so long as such failure continues, declare any
       dividend on its equity shares.

(ii) Prohibition in case of Section 8 Companies:
       According to section 8(1), a company having
       licence under Section 8 (Formation of
       companies with charitable objects, etc.) is
       prohibited from paying any dividend to its
       members. Its profits are intended to be applied only in promoting the
       objects for which it is formed.

     4. UNPAID DIVIDEND ACCOUNT (UDA)

Section 124 of the Act contains the provisions relating to Unpaid Dividend
Account (UDA). These are as follows:

(i) Unpaid or Unclaimed Dividend to be transferred to the Unpaid
Dividend Account- Where a dividend has been declared by a company but has
not been paid or claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of declaration, the
company shall, within seven (7) days from the expiry of the said period of 30 days,
transfer the total amount of unpaid or unclaimed dividend to a special account
called the Unpaid Dividend Account (UDA). The UDA shall be opened by the
company in any scheduled bank.

(ii) Preparing of Statement of the Unpaid Dividend- Within 90 days of
transferring any amount to the Unpaid Dividend Account, the company shall
prepare a statement containing the names, last known addresses and the amount
of unpaid dividend to be paid to each person and place such statement on its

11 Section 123 (6)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

web-site, if any, and also on any other web-site approved by the Central
Government for this purpose.

(iii) Payment of Interest if default is made in transferring the Amount- If
any default is made in transferring the total unpaid dividend amount or any part
thereof to the Unpaid Dividend Account, the company shall pay, from the date of
such default, interest at the rate of twelve per cent per annum on the amount not
so transferred to the said account. The interest accruing on such amount shall
ensure i.e. be available to the benefit of the members of the company in
proportion to the amount remaining unpaid to them.

(iv) Claimant to apply for payment of Claimed Amount- Any person claiming
to be entitled to any money transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account may
apply to the company concerned for payment of the money so claimed.

(v) Transfer of Unclaimed Amount to Investor Education and Protection
Fund (IEPF)- Any money transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account which
remains unpaid or unclaimed for seven (7) years from the date of such transfer
shall be transferred by the company along with interest accrued thereon to the
Investor Education and Protection Fund.

Further, the company shall send a prescribed statement containing the details of
such transfer to the IEPF Authority and in turn, the Authority shall issue a receipt
to the company as evidence of such transfer.

(vi) Transfer of Shares to IEPF- All shares in respect of which dividend has not
been paid or claimed for 7 consecutive years or more shall be transferred by the
company in the name of Investor Education and Protection Fund along with a
statement containing the prescribed details.

By way of Explanation, it is clarified that in case any dividend is paid or claimed
for any year during the said period of seven consecutive years, the share shall not
be transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund.

(vii) Right of Owner of `transferred shares' to Reclaim- Any claimant of shares
so transferred to IEPF shall be entitled to reclaim the `transferred shares' from
Investor Education and Protection Fund in accordance with the prescribed
procedure and on submission of prescribed documents.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                                        8.19

(viii) Punishment for Contravention- If a company fails to comply with any of
the requirements of this section, such company shall be liable to a penalty of one
lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five
hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues,
subject to a maximum of ten lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is
in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case
of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day
after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of two
lakh rupees.

                                Declared Dividend

                                                 Within 30 Days

Dividend Not Paid/ Claimed

                                                   Within 7 Days

   Deposit the unpaid/ unclaimed                   If not done             Pay Interest @
dividend amount in Scheduled Bank                                          12% p.a. (from the
 (Called Unpaid Dividend Account)                                          date of default)

                               Within 90 Days

Prepare Statement (Name, Last known
address, Unpaid dividend amount)

Website of  Place on                               Website approved by
Company                                            Govt. for this purpose

After the expiry of 7 Years from date of transfer

Transfer unpaid/unclaimed dividend along with interest to
IEPF

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.20  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

     5. INVESTOR EDUCATION AND PROTECTION

          FUND (IEPF)

Section 125 of the Act along with various Rules framed from time to time
including 12Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority (Accounting, Audit,
Transfer and Refund) Rules, 2016 deal with the Investor Education and Protection
Fund (IEPF). This fund, being established by the Central Government, shall be
credited with specified amounts and utilized for refund of unclaimed and unpaid
amounts, promotion of investors' awareness and protection of the interests of
investors, etc.

The relevant provisions are discussed below:

1. Credit of Specified Amounts to the Fund: Following specified amounts
       shall be credited to the Fund:

       (a) Amount given by the Central Government- The amount given by
               the Central Government by way of grants after due appropriation
               made by Parliament;

       (b) Donations by the Central Government- Donations given by the
               Central Government, State Governments, companies or any other
               institution for the purposes of the Fund;

       (c) Amount lying in the Unpaid Dividend Account- The amount lying in
               the Unpaid Dividend Account (UDA) of companies which is transferred
               by them to the Fund under section 124(5);

       (d) Amount in the General Revenue Account of the Central
               Government- The amount in the General Revenue Account of the
               Central Government which had been transferred to that account under
               section 205A(5) of the Companies Act, 1956 as it stood immediately
               before the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999
               and remaining unpaid or unclaimed on the commencement of the Act
               of 2013;

       (e) Amount in IEPF- The amount lying in the Investor Education and
               Protection Fund under section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956;

       (f) Income from Investments- The interest or other income received out
               of investments made from the Fund;

12 Notified vide Notification No. GSR 854 (E), dated 05.09.2016 w.e.f. 07.09.2016.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND  8.21

(g) Amount received through disgorgement or disposal of Securities-
       The amount received under section 38(4) i.e. amount received through
       disgorgement 13or disposal of securities seized from a person who has
       been convicted for personation for acquisition of securities as
       provided in section 38(3);

(h) Application Money- The application money received by companies
       for allotment of any securities and due for refund (only if such amount
       has remained unclaimed and unpaid for a period of seven years from
       the date it became due for payment);

(i) Matured Deposits- Matured deposits with companies other than
       banking companies (only if such amount has remained unclaimed and
       unpaid for a period of seven years from the date it became due for
       payment);

(j) Matured Debentures- Matured debentures with companies (only if
       such amount has remained unclaimed and unpaid for a period of
       seven years from the date it became due for payment);

(k) Interest- Interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses (h) to
       (j);

(l) Amount received from Sale Proceeds- Amount received from sale
       proceeds of fractional shares arising out of issuance of bonus shares,
       merger and amalgamation for seven or more years;

(m) Redemption Amount- Redemption amount of preference shares
       remaining unpaid or unclaimed for seven or more years; and

(n) Other Amounts- Such other amounts as prescribed in Rule 3 of the
       Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority (Accounting, Audit,
       Transfer and Refund) Rules, 2016. They are as under:

       (a) all amounts payable as mentioned in clause (a) to (n) of section
               125 (2) of the Act [as stated above];

       (b) all shares in accordance with section 124 (6) i.e. all those shares
               in whose case dividends have not been claimed or paid for seven
               consecutive years or more;

13 Disgorgement is the legally enforced repayment of ill-gotten gains imposed on wrongdoers
by the courts. Funds that were received through illegal or unethical business transactions are
disgorged, or paid back, often with interest and/or penalties to those affected by the action.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               (c) all the resultant benefits arising out of shares held by the
                       Authority under clause (b) above;

               (d) all grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under
                       these rules;

               (e) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as
                       may be decided upon by the Central Government;

               (f) all income earned by the Authority in any year;

               (fa) all shares held by the Authority in accordance with proviso of
                       sub-section (9) of section 90 of the Act and all the resultant
                       benefits arising out of such shares, without any restrictions;

               (g) all amounts payable as mentioned in sub-section (3) of section
                       10B of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
                       Undertakings) Act, 1970, section 10B of the Banking Companies
                       (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 sub-section
                       (3) of section 38A of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 and
                       section 40A of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Bank) Act,
                       1959; and; and

               (h) all other sums of money collected by the Authority as envisaged
                       in the Act.

       Further, according to Rule 3 (3), in case of term deposits and debentures of
       companies, due unpaid or unclaimed interest shall be transferred to the
       Fund along with the transfer of the matured amount of such term deposits
       and debentures.

2. Utilization of the Fund: According to section 125 (3) the Fund shall be
       utilized for:

       (a) refund of unclaimed dividends, matured deposits, matured
               debentures, the application money due for refund and interest
               thereon;

       (b) promotion of investors' education, awareness and protection;

       (c) distribution of any disgorged amount among eligible and identifiable
               applicants for shares or debentures, shareholders, debenture-holders
               or depositors who have suffered losses due to wrong actions by any
               person, in accordance with the orders made by the Court which had
               ordered disgorgement;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                     8.23

       (d) reimbursement of legal expenses incurred in pursuing class action
               suits under sections 37 and 245 by members, debenture-holders or
               depositors as may be sanctioned by the Tribunal; and

       (e) any other purpose incidental thereto in accordance with the rules
               framed under the Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority
               (Accounting, Audit, Transfer and Refund) Rules, 2016.

       Refund of Amount- A person amounts referred to in clauses (a) to (d) of
       sub-section (2) of section 205C were transferred to IEPF, after the expiry of 7
       years as per provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, shall be entitled to get
       refund out of the fund in respect of such claims in accordance with rules
       made under this section.

3. Application to the Authority for payment: According to section 125 (4),
       any person claiming to be entitled to the amount referred in section 125 (2)
       may apply to the Authority constituted under section 125 (5) for the
       payment of the money claimed.

4. Other Provisions governing the IEPF

       (i) Constitution of the Authority for Administration of Fund- In terms
               of Notification dated 13.01.201614, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
               has notified sub-section (5), sub-section (6) (except with respect to the
               manner of administration of the Fund) and sub-section (7) of section
               125 of the Act w.e.f. 13.01.2016. With this Notification, an Authority is
               being constituted for the administration and maintenance of accounts
               as well as other relevant records of the Fund.

               Further, with the notification of IEPF Authority (Appointment of
               Chairperson and Members, holding of Meetings and provision for
               Offices and Officers) Rules, 2016 on 13.01.2016, the Secretary, Ministry
               of Corporate Affairs shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the
               Authority. In addition, there shall be six members (maximum limit
               seven) and a Chief Executive Officer who shall be the convenor of the
               Authority.

       (ii) Provision of required Resources by the Central Government for
               Administration of the Fund- The Central Government may provide to

14 Vide Notification No. GSR 26 (E), dated 13.01.2016.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       the Authority such offices, officers, employees and other resources in
       accordance with the IEPF Authority (Appointment of Chairperson and
       Members, holding of Meetings and provision for Offices and Officers)
       Rules, 2016.

(iii) Authority to work in consultation with CAG of India- The Authority
       shall administer the Fund and maintain separate accounts and other
       relevant records in relation to the Fund in such form as may be
       prescribed after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
       General of India.

(iv) Spending of Money- The Authority shall be competent to spend
       money out of the Fund for carrying out the objects specified in section
       125 (3) i.e. purposes for which the fund shall be utilized.

(v) Audit of the Fund- The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the
       Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be
       specified by him. Such audited accounts together with the audit report
       thereon shall be forwarded annually by the Authority to the Central
       Government.

(vi) Preparation of Annual Report by the Authority- For each financial
       year, the Authority shall prepare in the prescribed form and at
       prescribed time its annual report giving full account of its activities
       during the financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central
       Government. In turn, the Central Government shall cause the annual
       report and the audit report given by the Comptroller and Auditor-
       General of India to be laid before each House of Parliament.

     6. RIGHT OF DIVIDEND, RIGHTS SHARES AND
          BONUS SHARES TO BE HELD IN ABEYANCE
          PENDING REGISTRATION OF TRANSFER OF
          SHARES

According to Section 126, in case any instrument of transfer of shares has been
delivered by a shareholder for registration and the transfer of such shares has not
been registered by the company, such company shall take the following steps:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.25

(a) Transfer the dividend in relation to such shares to the Unpaid Dividend
       Account unless it is authorised by the registered holder of such share in
       writing to pay such dividend to the transferee specified in the instrument of
       transfer; and

(b) Keep in abeyance in relation to such shares any offer of rights shares under
       section 62 (1) (a) and any issue of fully paid-up bonus shares in pursuance
       of first proviso to section 123 (5).

     7. PUNISHMENT FOR FAILURE TO DISTRIBUTE
          DIVIDENDS WITHIN 30 DAYS

Section 127 of the Act contains time limit for distribution of dividends and
punishment for failure to distribute dividend on time. Certain exemptions from
punishments are also provided. These provisions are stated as under:

A. Time Limit for Distribution of Dividends

       Where a company declares dividend, it must be paid or the dividend
       warrant thereof must be posted within 30 days from the date of declaration
       of dividend to the shareholders entitled to the same. Posting of dividend
       warrants within 30 days absolves the company from any punishment
       irrespective of whether it is received by the shareholder concerned within
       this time or not. The offence is committed only when the company fails to
       post dividend warrants to the registered address of the members within 30
       days of declaration. Non-receipt of dividend warrants by the shareholders
       within the prescribed time does not attract any punishment.

B. Punishment for Failure

       In case a company fails to pay declared dividends or fails to post dividend
       warrants within 30 days of declaration, following punishments are
       applicable:

       (i) Every director of the company shall be punishable with imprisonment
               of up to two years, if he is knowingly a party to the default. And, he
               shall also be liable to pay minimum fine of ` 1,000 for every day
               during which such default continues.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           8.26           CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ii) The company shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 18%
               p.a. during the period for which such default continues.

C. Exemption from Punishment

       Under the following cases, where the company has failed to pay declared
       dividend within 30 days of declaration, no offence shall be deemed to have
       been committed and therefore, no punishment is attracted:

       (a) where the dividend could not be paid by reason of the operation of
               any law;

       (b) where a shareholder has given directions to the company regarding
               the payment of the dividend and those directions cannot be complied
               with and the same has been communicated to him;

       (c) where there is a dispute regarding the right to receive the dividend;

       (d) where the dividend has been lawfully adjusted by the company
               against any sum due to it from the shareholder;

       (e) where, for any other reason, the failure to pay the dividend or to post
               the warrant within the prescribed period of 30 days was not due to
               any default on the part of the company.

           Exemption from Punishment under Section 127

Dividend    Shareholder                             Dispute    Dividend      for any
  could          gave                              regarding   has been       other
 not be                                                        lawfully     reason,
 paid by     directions                             right to  adjusted     the failure
             regarding                               receive    against      to pay/
reason of   payment of                              dividend   any sum         post
              dividend,                                       due from      dividend
operation                                                                    warrant
 of any          AND                                          shareholder  within the
   law                                                                     prescribed
                those                                              to      time, was
             directions                                       company      not due to
             cannot be                                                         any
             complied                                                      default on
            with and the                                                   the part of
              same has
                                                                               the
                 been                                                      company.
           communicated

                to him

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND  8.27

Illustration 6: Mr. Alok, holding equity shares of face value of ` 10 lakh, has
not paid ` 80,000 towards call money due on shares. Can the dividend amount
payable to him be adjusted against such dues? Give reasons for your answer.

Answer: Yes. As per clause (d) of Proviso to Section 127, where the dividend
is declared by a company and there remains calls in arrears or any other
sum due from a member, then the dividend can be lawfully adjusted by the
company against any such dues.

Thus, the action of the company adjusting dividend payable to Mr. Alok
towards call money due on shares amounting to ` 80,000 is justified and
therefore, no punishment is attracted.

Applicability of Section 127 to Nidhis

In terms of Notification No. GSR 465 (E), dated 05-06-2015, Section 127 dealing
with punishment shall apply to the Nidhis, subject to the following
modification:

In case the dividend payable to a member is ` 100 or less, it shall be
sufficient compliance of the provisions of the section 127, if the declaration
of the dividend is announced in the local language in one local newspaper
of wide circulation and announcement of the said declaration is also
displayed on the notice board of the Nidhis for at least 3 months.

SUMMARY

 Section 2(35) of the Companies Act, 2013, states that "dividend" includes
       any interim dividend.

 Dividend can be declared out of:
        Profits of the current year after depreciation,
        Profits for any previous financial year or years arrived at after
               providing for depreciation and remaining undistributed,
        Both of the above,
        Money provided by the Central Government or a State Government
               for the payment of dividend by the company in pursuance of a
               guarantee given by that Government.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       [Note: Depreciation shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
       Schedule II.]
 Before declaration of dividend, the company may, at its discretion, transfer
       any appropriate percentage of its profits to the reserves.
 When there is inadequacy or absence of profits, the company may declare
       dividend out of free reserves after following the conditions prescribed in the
       Rules.
 Amount of dividend (including interim dividend) shall be deposited in a
       separate bank account maintained with a scheduled bank within 5 days
       from the date of declaration of dividend.
 Payment of dividend-
        Payable

                in cash; or
                by cheque; or
                by dividend warrant; or
                by any electronic mode
        Payable
                to the registered shareholder of the shares; or
                to his order; or
                to his banker.
        In case of Nidhis
                any dividend payable in cash may be paid by crediting the same to

                       the account of the member, if the dividend is not claimed within 30
                       days from the date of declaration of the dividend.
 Unpaid Dividend Account (UDA)
        Declared dividend not paid or claimed to be transferred to the Unpaid
               Dividend Account (UDA).

        Prepare statement of particulars of the unpaid dividend.

        Default in transferring of amount to UDA - Interest @ 12% p.a.

        Entitled shareholders can apply for payment of amount from UDA.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.29

        Transfer unpaid or unclaimed amount of dividend (and shares thereof) to
               Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) after the expiry of seven
               years from the date of such transfer to UDA.

        Right of owner of shares transferred to IEPF to claim from IEPF: Claimant
               of transferred shares is entitled to reclaim the transfer of shares from IEPF
               by following the prescribed procedure and on submission of prescribed
               documents.

        In case any dividend is paid or claimed for any year during the said
               period of 7 consecutive years, the shares shall not be transferred to IEPF.

        Punishment: In case a company fails to pay declared dividends or fails to
               post dividend warrants within 30 days of declaration, company shall be
               liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure,
               with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the
               first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of ten
               lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
               liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of
               continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for
               each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to
               a maximum of two lakh rupees.

 Exemptions from punishment under section 127

        dividend could not be paid by reason of operation of any law;

        shareholder gave directions regarding payment of dividend but those
               directions could not be complied with and the same had been
               communicated to him;

        dispute regarding right to receive dividend;

        dividend had been lawfully adjusted against any sum due from the
               shareholder to the company;

        for any other reason and the failure to pay/post dividend warrant within
               the prescribed time was not due to any default on the part of the
               company.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. When the dividend is declared at the Annual General Meeting of the
       company, it is known as ....
        (a) Final Dividend
        (b) Interim Dividend
        (c) Dividend on preference shares
        (d) Scrip Divided

2. Amount to be transferred to reserves out of profits before any declaration of
       dividend is ___________
        (a) 5%
        (b) 7.5%
        (c) 10%
        (d) at the discretion of the company.

3. The Board of Directors of Vidyut Limited are contemplating to declare interim
       dividend in the last week of July, 2024 but the company has incurred loss
       during the current financial year up to the end of June, 2024. However, it is
       noted that during the previous five financial years i.e., 2019-20, 2020-21,
       2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, the company had declared dividend at the
       rate of 8%, 9%, 12%, 11% and 10% respectively. Advise the Board as to the
       maximum rate at which they can declare interim dividend despite incurring
       loss during the current financial year.
       (a) Maximum at the rate of 10%.
       (b) Maximum at the rate of 11%.
       (c) Maximum at the rate of 10.5%.
        (d) Maximum at the rate of 11.5%.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.31

4. The amount accumulated in the Investor Education and Protection Fund shall
       not be used for:

        (a) refunds in respect of unclaimed dividends, matured deposits, matured
                debentures, application money due for refund and interest thereon.

        (b) reimbursement of legal expenses incurred in pursuing class action suits
                under section 37 and 245.

        (c) grants or donation to the Central Government for the purpose of
                investor's education and training.

        (d) distribution of any disgorged amount among eligible and identifiable
                applicants who have suffered losses.

5. In case a company fails to pay declared dividends or fails to post dividend
       warrants within 30 days of declaration, company shall be liable to pay simple
       interest at the rate of .........during the period for which such default continues.

        (a) 6% p.a.

        (b) 12% p.a.

        (c) 15% p.a.

        (d) 18% p.a.

Descriptive Questions

1. The Annual General Meeting of ABC Bakers Limited held on 30th May, 2024,
       declared a dividend at the rate of 30% payable on its paid-up equity share
       capital as recommended by Board of Directors. However, the company was
       unable to post the dividend warrant to Mr. Ranjan, an equity shareholder, up
       to 25th July, 2024. Mr. Ranjan filed a suit against the company for the
       payment of dividend along with interest at the rate of 20 percent per annum
       for the period of default. Decide in the light of provisions of the Companies
       Act, 2013, whether Mr. Ranjan would succeed? Also, state the directors'
       liability in this regard under the Act.

2. The Board of Directors of Future Fashions Limited at its meeting
       recommended a dividend on its paid-up equity share capital which was later
       on approved by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting. Thereafter,
       the directors at another meeting of the Board passed a board resolution for

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       diverting the total dividend to be paid to the shareholders for purchase of
       certain short-term investments in the name of the company. As a result,
       dividend was paid to shareholders after 45 days.

       Examining the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, state whether the act of
       directors is in violation of the provisions of the Act and if so, state the
       consequences that shall follow for the above violative act.

3. Referring to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, examine the validity
       of the following:

       The Board of Directors of ABC Tractors Limited proposes to declare dividend
       at the rate of 20% to the equity shareholders, despite the fact that the
       company has defaulted in repayment of public deposits accepted before the
       commencement of this Act.

4. Star Computers Limited declared and paid dividend in time to all its equity
       holders for the financial year 2023-24, except in the following two cases:

       (i) Mrs. Sheela Bhatt, holding 250 shares had mandated the company to
               directly deposit the dividend amount in her bank account. The company,
               accordingly remitted the dividend but the bank returned the payment
               on the ground that there was difference in surname of the payee in the
               bank records. The company, however, did not inform Mrs. Sheela Bhatt
               about this discrepancy.

       (ii) Dividend amount of ` 50,000 was not paid to the successor of Late
               Mr. Mohan, in view of the court order restraining the payment due to
               family dispute about succession.

       You are required to analyse these cases with reference to provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013 regarding failure to distribute dividends.

5. Alpha Herbals, a Section 8 company is planning to declare dividend in the
       Annual General Meeting for the Financial Year ended 31-03-2024. Mr. Chopra
       is holding 800 equity shares as on date. State whether the act of the company
       is according to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.

6. YZ Medical Instruments Limited is a manufacturing company & has proposed
       a dividend @ 10% for the year 2023-2024 out of the profits of current year.
       The company has earned a profit of ` 910 crore during 2023-2024. The

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.33

       company does not intend to transfer any amount to the general reserves out
       of the profits. Is YZ Medical Instruments Limited allowed to do so? Comment.

7. PQ Ltd. declared and paid 10% dividend to all its shareholders except Mr.
       Kumar, holding 500 equity shares, who instructed the company to deposit the
       dividend amount directly in his bank account. The company accordingly
       remitted the dividend, but the bank returned the payment on the ground that
       the account number as given by Mr. Kumar doesn't tally with the records of
       the bank. The company, however, did not inform Mr. Kumar about this
       discrepancy. Comment on this issue with reference to the provisions of the
       Companies Act, 2013 regarding failure to distribute dividend.

8. Alex limited is facing loss in business during the financial year 2023-2024. In
       the immediate preceding three financial years, the company had declared
       dividend at the rate of 7%, 11% and 12% respectively. The Board of Directors
       has decided to declare 12% interim dividend for the current financial year
       atleast to be in par with the immediate preceding year. Is the act of the Board
       of Directors valid?

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.       (a) Final Dividend

2.       (d) at the discretion of the company.

3.       (b) Maximum at the rate of 11%

4.       (c) grants or donation to the Central Government for the purpose

         of investor's education and training.

5.       (d) 18% p.a.

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. Section 127 of the Companies Act, 2013 lays down the penalty for non-
       payment of dividend within the prescribed time period of 30 days.
       According to this section where a dividend has been declared by a company
       but has not been paid or the warrant in respect thereof has not been posted

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       within 30 days from the date of declaration of dividend to any shareholder
       entitled to the payment of dividend:

       (a) every director of the company shall, if he is knowingly a party to the
                default, be punishable with imprisonment maximum up to two years
                and with minimum fine of rupees one thousand for every day during
                which such default continues; and

       (b) the company shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 18%
                per annum during the period for which such default continues.

       Therefore, in the given case Mr. Ranjan will not succeed if he claims interest
       at 20% interest as the limit under section 127 is 18% per annum.

2. According to section 124 of the Companies Act, 2013, where a dividend has
       been declared by a company but has not been paid or claimed within 30 days
       from the date of the declaration, the company shall, within 7 days from the
       date of expiry of the said period of 30 days, transfer the total amount of
       dividend which remains unpaid or unclaimed to a special account to be opened
       by the company in any scheduled bank to be called the Unpaid Dividend
       Account.

       Further, according to section 127 of the Companies Act, 2013, where a
       dividend has been declared by a company but has not been paid or the
       warrant in respect thereof has not been posted within 30 days from the date
       of declaration to any entitled shareholder, every director of the company
       shall, if he is knowingly a party to the default, be liable for punishment.

       In the present case, the Board of Directors of Future Fashions Limited at its
       meeting recommended a dividend on its paid-up equity share capital which
       was later on approved by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
       Thereafter, the directors at another meeting of the Board decided by
       passing a board resolution for diverting the total dividend to be paid to the
       shareholders for purchase of certain short-term investments in the name of
       the company. As a result, dividend was paid to shareholders after 45 days.

       (i). Since, declared dividend has not been paid within 30 days from the
               date of the declaration to any shareholder entitled to the payment of
               dividend, the company shall, within 7 days from the date of expiry of
               the said period of 30 days, transfer the total amount of dividend which

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.35

               remains unpaid or unclaimed to a special account to be opened by the
               company in any scheduled bank to be called the Unpaid Dividend
               Account.

       (ii). The Board of Directors of Future Fashions Limited has violated section
               127 of the Companies Act, 2013 as it failed to pay dividend to
               shareholders within 30 days due to its decision to divert the total
               dividend to be paid to shareholders for purchase of certain short-term
               investments in the name of the company.

       Consequences: The following are the consequences for violation of the
       above provisions:

       (a) Every director of the company shall, if he is knowingly a party to the
               default, be punishable with maximum imprisonment of two years and
               shall also be liable for a minimum fine of rupees one thousand for
               every day during which such default continues.

       (b) The company shall also be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 18%
               p.a. during the period for which such default continues.

3. Section 123(6) of the Companies Act, 2013, specifically provides that a
       company which fails to comply with the provisions of section 73 (Prohibition
       of acceptance of deposits from public) and section 74 (Repayment of
       deposits, etc., accepted before the commencement of this Act) shall not, so
       long as such failure continues, declare any dividend on its equity shares.

       In the given instance, the Board of Directors of ABC Tractors Limited
       proposes to declare dividend at the rate of 20% to the equity shareholders,
       in spite of the fact that the company has defaulted in repayment of public
       deposits accepted before the commencement of the Companies Act, 2013.
       Hence, according to the above provision, declaration of dividend by the ABC
       Tractors Limited is not valid.

4. (i) Section 127 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for punishment for
               failure to distribute dividend on time. One of such situations is where
               a shareholder has given directions to the company regarding the
               payment of the dividend and those directions could not be complied
               with but the non-compliance was not communicated to him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               In the given situation, the company has failed to communicate to the
               shareholder Mrs. Sheela Bhatt about non-compliance of her direction
               regarding payment of dividend. Hence, the penal provisions under
               section 127 will be applicable.

       (ii) Section 127, inter-alia, provides that no offence shall be deemed to
               have been committed where the dividend could not be paid by reason
               of operation of law.

               In the present case, the dividend could not be paid because it was not
               allowed to be paid by the court until the matter was resolved about
               succession. Hence, there will not be any liability on the company and its
               directors, etc.

5. According to Section 8(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, the companies
        licenced under Section 8 of the Act (Formation of companies with
        Charitable Objects, etc.) are prohibited from paying any dividend to their
        members. Their profits are intended to be applied only in promoting the
        objects for which they are formed.

        Hence, in the instant case, the proposed act of Alpha Herbals, a company
        licenced under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013, which is planning to
        declare dividend, is not according to the provisions of the Companies Act,
        2013.

6. According to section 123 of the Companies Act, 2013 a company may,
       before the declaration of any dividend in any financial year, transfer such
       percentage of its profits for that financial year as it may consider
       appropriate to the reserves of the company. Such transfer is not mandatory
       and the percentage to be transferred to reserves is at the discretion of the
       company.

       As per the given facts, YZ Medical Instruments Limited has earned a profit
       of ` 910 crore for the financial year 2023-2024. It has proposed a dividend
       @ 10%. However, it does not intend to transfer any amount to the reserves
       of the company out of the profits of current year.

       As per the provisions stated above, the amount to be transferred to reserves
       out of profits for any financial year is at the discretion of the company
       acting through its Board of Directors. Therefore, at its discretion, if YZ
       Medical Instruments Limited decides not to transfer any profit to reserves
       before the declaration of dividend at 10%, it is legally allowed to do so.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND                8.37

7. Section 127 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides for punishment for failure
       to distribute dividend on time. One of such situations is where a
       shareholder has given directions to the company regarding the payment of
       the dividend and those directions cannot be complied with and the same
       has not been communicated to the shareholder.

        In the instant case, PQ Ltd. has failed to communicate to the shareholder Mr.
        Kumar about non-compliance of his direction regarding payment of dividend.
        Hence, the penal provisions under section 127 will be attracted.

8. As per Section 123(3) of the Companies Act, 2013, the Board of Directors of
        a company may declare interim dividend during any financial year out of
        the surplus in the profit and loss account and out of profits of the financial
        year in which such interim dividend is sought to be declared.

        Provided that in case the company has incurred loss during the current
        financial year up to the end of the quarter immediately preceding the date
        of declaration of interim dividend, such interim dividend shall not be
        declared at a rate higher than the average dividends declared by the
        company during the immediately preceding three financial years.

        According to the given facts, Alex Ltd. is facing loss in business during the
        financial year 2023-2024. In the immediate preceding three financial years,
        the company declared dividend at the rate of 7%, 11% and 12%
        respectively. Accordingly, the rate of dividend declared shall not exceed
        10%, the average of the rates (7+11+12=30/3) at which dividend was
        declared by it during the immediately preceding three financial years.

        Therefore, the act of the Board of Directors as to declaration of interim
        dividend at the rate of 12% during the F.Y 2023-2024 is not valid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
