CHAPTER  a  2

INTERPRETATION
OF STATUTES

                                          LEARNING OUTCOMES

 At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
  Gain knowledge about the need for interpretation of

       statutes.
  Explain the various Rules of Interpretation of Statutes.
  Describe about the various internal and external aids to

       interpretation.
  Comprehend the Rules of Interpretation of Deeds and

       Documents.
a  2.2               CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

                                       Introduction of relevant
                                                   terms

                                              Importance of
                                            interpretation of

                                                  Statutes

                     Rules of Interpretation                      Primary Rules
                                                                 Secondary Rules
 Interpretation of
statutes, deeds and

     documents

                     Aids to interpretation                      Internal aids
                                                                 External aids
                     Rules of interpretation
                           of deeds and

                         documents

    1. INTRODUCTION

As a Chartered Accountant in practice or in service, you will be required to read
various laws and statutes. Often these enactments may be capable of more than
one interpretation. It is in this context that awareness of interpretation as a skill
becomes relevant. This chapter will enable you to understand certain rules of
interpretation as well as the various internal and external aids to interpretation.
We shall also discuss the art of interpreting deeds and documents.

This study relates to `Interpretation of Statutes, Deeds and Documents'. So, it
is necessary that we understand what these words and certain other terms
denote.

`Statute': To the common man the term `Statute' generally means laws and
regulations of various kinds irrespective of the source from which they emanate.
        INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.3    a

The word "statute" is now synonymous with an Act of Parliament. Broadly
speaking it is the written law that the legislature establishes directly. Maxwell
defines "statute" as the will of the legislature. In India `statute' means an enacted
law i.e. the law either enacted by the Parliament or by the state legislature.

In India the constitution provides for the passing of a bill in Lok Sabha and Rajya
Sabha and finally after obtaining the assent of the President of India to it, it
becomes an Act of Parliament or Statute.

Thus, that which originates through legislation is called "enacted law" or statute
as against "unenacted" or "unwritten law".

However, the Constitution does not use the terms `statute' though one finds the
terms `law' used in many places. The term `law' is defined as including any
ordinance, order, bye- law, rule, regulation, notification, and the like.

In short `statute' signifies written law as against unwritten law.

`Document': Generally understood, a document is a paper or other material thing
giving information, proof or evidence of anything. The Law defines `document' in
a more technical form. Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 states that
`document' means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by
means of letters, figures or marks or by more than one of those means, intended
to be used, or which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.

Example 1: A writing is a document; any words printed, photographed are
documents.

Section 3(18) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 states that the term `document' shall
include any matter written, expressed or described upon any substance by means of
letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means which is intended to be
used, or which may be used, for the purpose of recording this matter.
Generally, documents comprise of following four elements:

        Elements of documents

Matter  Record  Substance           means
a  2.4  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(i) Matter--This is the first element. Its usage with the word "any" shows that the
       definition of document is comprehensive.

(ii) Record--This second element must be certain mutual or mechanical device
       employed on the substance. It must be by writing, expression or description.

(iii) Substance--This is the third element on which a mental or intellectual
       elements comes to find a permanent form.

(iv) Means--This represents forth element by which such permanent form is
       acquired and those can be letters, any figures, marks, symbols which can be
       used to communicate between two persons.

`Instrument': In common parlance, `instrument' means a formal legal document
which creates or confirms a right or records a fact. It is a formal writing of any
kind, such as an agreement, deed, charter or record, drawn up and executed in a
technical form. It also means a formal legal document having legal effect, either
as creating a right or liability or as affording evidence of it.

Section 2(14) of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 states that `instrument' includes every
document by which any right or liability is or purports to be created, transferred,
extended, extinguished or recorded.

`Deed': The Legal Glossary defines `deed' as an instrument in writing (or other
legible representation or words on parchment or paper) purporting to effect
some legal disposition. Simply stated deeds are instruments though all
instruments may not be deeds. However, in India no distinction seems to be made
between instruments and deeds.

`Interpretation': By interpretation is meant the process by which the Courts seek
to ascertain the meaning of the legislature through the medium of the words in
which it is expressed. Simply stated, `interpretation' is the process by which the
real meaning of an Act (or a document) and the intention of the legislature in
enacting it (or of the parties executing the document) is ascertained.

Interpretation is resorted to in order to resolve any ambiguity in the statute. It is
the art of finding out the true sense of words that is to say the sense in which
their author intended to convey the subject matter.

Importance of Interpretation: Interpretation, thus, process of considerable
significance. In relation to statute law, interpretation is of importance because of
the inherent nature of legislation as a source of law. The process of statute
making and the process of interpretation of statutes take place separately from
                 INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES                2.5  a

each other, and two different agencies are concerned. Interpretation serves as
the bridge of understanding between the two.

Classification of Interpretation:

                 General Classification of Interpretation

                 Legal                       Doctrinal

Authentic               Usual            Grammatical       Logical

 when rule of            when rule of    when the court    when the court
interpretation          interpretation     applies only     goes beyond
is derived from         is derived from   the ordinary     the words and
 the legislator                                                 tries to
                          some other     rules of speech    discover the
    himself             source such as                       intention of
                        custom or case                      the statute in
                                                             some other
                               law
                                                                 way

Jolowicz, in his Lectures on Jurisprudence (1963 ed., p. 280) speaks of
interpretation thus:

Interpretation is usually said to be either `legal' or `doctrinal'. It is `legal' when
there is an actual rule of law which binds the Judge to place a certain
interpretation of the statute. It is `doctrinal' when its purpose is to discover `real'
and `true' meaning of the statute.

`Legal' interpretation is sub-divided into `authentic' and `usual'. It is `authentic'
when rule of interpretation is derived from the legislator himself; it is `usual' when
it comes from some other source such as custom or case law. Thus, when
Justinian ordered that all the difficulties arising out of his legislation should be
a  2.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

referred to him for decision, he was providing for `authentic' interpretation, and
so also was the Prussian Code, 1794, when it was laid down that Judges should
report any doubt as to its meaning to a Statute Commission and abide by their
ruling.

`Doctrinal' interpretation may again be divided into two categories:
`grammatical' and `logical'. It is `grammatical' when the court applies only the
ordinary rules of speech for finding out the meaning of the words used in the
statute. On the other hand, when the court goes beyond the words and tries to
discover the intention of the statute in some other way, then it is said resort to
what is called a `logical' interpretation.

According to Fitzerald, interpretation is of two kinds ­ `literal' and `functional'.
The literal interpretation is that which regards conclusively the verbal expression
of the law. It does not look beyond the `literaligis'. The duty of the Court is to
ascertain the intention of the legislature and seek for that intent in every
legitimate way, but first of all in the words and the language employed.
`Functional' interpretation, on the other hand, is that which departs from the
letter of the law and seeks elsewhere for some other and more satisfactory
evidence of the true intention of the legislature. In other words, it is necessary to
determine the relative claims of the letters and the spirit of the enacted law. In all
ordinary cases, the Courts must be content to accept the letter of the law as the
exclusive and conclusive evidence of the spirit of the law (Salmon:
Jurisprudence, 12th ed., pp. 131-132). It is essential to determine with accuracy
the relations which subsist between the two methods.

`Construction' as applied to a written statute or document means to determine
from its known elements its true meaning or the intention of its framers.
Construction involves drawing conclusions beyond the actual expressions used in
the text. This is done by referring to other parts of the enactment and the context
in which the law was made. Thus, when you construe a statute you are attempting
to ascertain the intention of the legislature.

Difference between Interpretation and Construction:

It would also be worthwhile to note, at this stage itself, the difference between
the terms `Interpretation' and Construction. While more often the two terms
are used interchangeably to denote a process adopted by the courts to ascertain
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.7  a

the meaning of the legislature from the words with which it is expressed, these
two terms have different connotations.

Interpretation is the art of ascertaining the meaning of words and the true sense
in which the author intended that they should be understood.

It is the drawing of conclusions from a statute that lie beyond the direct
expression of the words used therein. [Bhagwati Prasad Kedia v. C.I.T, (2001)]

It is the duty of the courts to give effect to the meaning of an Act when the
meaning can be equitably gathered from the words used. Words of legal import
occurring in a statute which have acquired a definite and precise sense, must be
understood in that sense. (State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerly Co. AIR 1958)

Thus, where the Court adheres to the plain meaning of the language used by the
legislature, it would be `interpretation' of the words, but where the meaning is not
plain, the court has to decide whether the wording was meant to cover the
situation before the court. Here, the court would be resorting to `construction'.
Conclusions drawn by means of construction are within the spirit though not
necessarily within the letter of the law.

In practice construction includes interpretation and the terms are frequently used
synonymously.

    2. WHY DO WE NEED INTERPRETATION/
          CONSTRUCTION?

While every care is taken to ensure that laws framed for passing by the legislature
are free from ambiguity and absurdity, it is scarcely possible to express them in
such terms as shall be free from all ambiguity. Such a degree of precision is
perhaps unattainable. Similarly, the legislators cannot foresee all contingencies at
the time of the passing of the law. This is further compounded by the want of
views sufficiently comprehensive as to the "intention of the legislation". It is quite
possible that the words of a statute are vague, ambiguous or reasonably capable
of more than one meaning. It is then that a need for interpretation or
construction arises.

Hence rules of interpretation are required in order to ensure just and uniform
decisions.
a  2.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

No better explanation can be given for the need for interpretation than that
provided by Denning L.J., that ultimate repository of legal erudition:

"It is not within human powers to foresee the manifold sets of facts which may
arise; and that, even if it were, it is not possible to provide for them in terms free
from all ambiguity. The English language is not an instrument of mathematical
precision. Our literature would be much the poorer if it were. This is where the
draftsmen of Acts of Parliament have often been unfairly criticized. A judge,
believing himself to be fettered by the supposed rule that he must look to the
language and nothing else, laments that the draftsmen have not provided for this
or that, or have been guilty of some or other ambiguity. It would certainly save
the judges' trouble if Acts of Parliament were drafted with divine prescience and
perfect clarity. In the absence of it, when a defect appears, a judge cannot simply
fold his hands and blame the draftsman. He must set to work on the constructive
task of finding the intention of Parliament, and he must do this, not only from the
language of the statute, but also from a consideration of the social conditions
which gave rise to it, and of the mischief which it was passed to remedy, and then
he must supplement the written word so as to give `force and life' to the intention
of the legislature".

It has been rightly said that a statute is the will of the legislature. The
fundamental rule of interpretation of a statute is that it should be expounded
according to the intent of those that made it. In the event of the words of the
statute being precise and unambiguous in themselves it is only just necessary to
expound those words in their natural and ordinary sense. Thus far and no further.
This is because these words distinctly indicate the intention of the legislature. The
purpose of interpretation is to discern the intention which is conveyed either
expressly or impliedly by the language used. If the intention is express, then the
task becomes one of `verbal construction' alone. But in the absence of any
intention being expressed by the statute on the question to which it gives rise
and yet some intention has to be, of necessity, imputed to the legislature
regarding it, then the interpreter has to determine it by inference based on
certain legal principles. In such a case, the interpretation has to be one which is
commensurate with the public benefit. Consequently, if a statute levies a penalty
without expressly mentioning the recipient of the penalty, then, by implication, it
goes to the coffers of the State.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES                      2.9  a

As we have noted earlier, `interpretation' may be either `grammatical' or
`logical'. Grammatical or literal interpretation concerns itself with the words and
expressions used in a statute and only that. In other words, the emphasis in
grammatical interpretation is on "what the law says." The Logical interpretation,
on the other hand, seeks to ascertain "what the law means".

Normally, grammatical interpretation is the     expositore non
only approach to be adopted. The court
cannot add to or modify a single word or
phrase used in an enactment. This is based on
the principle of absoluta sententia expositore
non indiget meaning "clear words need no
explanation."

However, where the grammatical interpretation leads to a manifest absurdity or is
logically flawed, the courts can adopt the logical interpretation that will advance
the true purpose or intention of the legislation rather than reduce it to a futility.
Where there are two constructions reasonably applicable to a provision, one of
which is mechanical and based on the rules of grammar, while the other is vibrant
and more in tune with the basic intention of the Act of Parliament, the latter shall
be preferred to the former. (Arora v. State of UP)

But where the law is clear and unambiguous the court shall construe it based
on the strict grammatical meaning. The law when clear shall be strictly applied,
however harsh or burdensome it may be. The court shall administer the law as it
stands and shall not attempt an alternative interpretation based on logic that is
ostensibly just or reasonable.

    3. RULES OF INTERPRETATION/ CONSTRUCTION

Over a period, certain rules of interpretation/construction have come to be well
recognized. However, these rules are considered as guides only and are not
inflexible. These rules can be broadly classified as follows:
a  2.10        CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

     Primary     · Rule of Literal Construction
        Rules    · Rule of Reasonable Construction
                 · Rule of Harmonious Construction
Secondary        · The Rule in Heydon's Case or
   Rules
                   Mischief Rule
                 · Rule of Beneficial Construction
                 · Rule of Exceptional Construction
                 · Rule of Ejusdem Generis

               · Doctrine of Noscitur a Sociis
               · Doctrine of Contemporanea Expositio

(A) PRIMARY RULES

(1) Rule of Literal Construction:

The first and primary rule of construction is that the intention of the legislature
must be found in the words used by the legislature itself. Thus, if the words of a
statute are capable of one construction only, then it would not be open to the
courts to adopt any hypothetical construction on the ground that such
hypothetical construction is more consistent with the alleged object and policy of
the Act.

It is a cardinal rule of construction that a statute must be construed literally and
grammatically giving the words their ordinary and natural meaning. Therefore, the
language used in the statute must be construed in its grammatical sense. The
correct course is to take the words themselves and arrive if possible, at their
meaning without reference to cases, in the first instance.

If the phraseology of a statute is clear and unambiguous and capable of one and
only one interpretation, then it would not be correct to extrapolate these words
out of their natural and ordinary sense. When the language of a statute is plain
and unambiguous it is not open to the courts to adopt any other hypothetical
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.11  a

construction simply with a view to carrying out the supposed intention of the
legislature.

Thus, it is the primary duty of the court to interpret the words used in legislation
according to their ordinary grammatical meaning in the absence of any ambiguity
or doubt.

Normally, where the words of a statute are in themselves clear and unambiguous,
then these words should be construed in their natural and ordinary sense and it is
not open to the court to adopt any other hypothetical construction. This is called
the rule of literal construction.

This principle is contained in the Latin maxim "absoluta sententia expositore non
indiget" which literally means "an absolute sentence or preposition needs not an
expositor". In other words, plain words require no explanation.

Sometimes, occasions may arise when a choice has to be made between two
interpretations ­ one narrower and the other wider or bolder. In such a situation,
if the narrower interpretation would fail to achieve the manifest purpose of the
legislation, one should rather adopt the wider one.

When we talk of disclosure of `the nature of concern or interest, financial or
otherwise' of a director or the manager of a company in the subject-matter of a
proposed motion (as referred to in section 102 of the Companies Act, 2013), we
have to interpret in its broader sense of referring to any concern or interest
containing any information and facts that may enable members to understand the
meaning, scope and implications of the items of business and to take decisions
thereon. What is required is a full and frank disclosure without reservation or
suppression, as, for instance where a son or daughter or father or mother or
brother or sister is concerned in any contract or matter, the shareholders ought
fairly to be informed of it and the material facts disclosed to them. Here a
restricted narrow interpretation would defeat the very purpose of the disclosure.

Similarly, when a matter which should have been, but has not been, provided for
in a statute cannot be supplied by courts as to do so would amount to legislation
and would not be construction.
a  2.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

This Rule of literal interpretation can be read and understood under the following
headings:

Natural and grammatical meaning: Statutes are to be first understood in their
natural, ordinary, or popular sense and must be construed according to their
plain, literal and grammatical meaning. If there is an inconsistency with any
express intention or declared purpose of the statute, or it involves any absurdity,
repugnancy, inconsistency, the grammatical sense must then be modified,
extended or abridged only to avoid such an inconvenience, but no further. [(State
of HP v. Pawan Kumar (2005)]

Example 2: In a question before the court whether the sale of betel leaves was
subject to sales tax. The Supreme Court held that betel leaves could not be given
the dictionary, technical or botanical meaning when the ordinary and natural
meaning is clear and unambiguous. Being the word of everyday use, it must be
understood in its popular sense by which people are conversant with it as also the
meaning which the statute dealing with the matter would attribute to it.
Therefore, the sale of betel leaves was liable to sale tax. (Ramavtar v. Assistant
Sales Tax Officer, AIR 1961 SC 1325)

Technical words are to be understood in technical sense: This point of literal
construction is that technical words are understood in the technical sense only.

In construing the word `practice' in the Supreme Court Advocates Act, 1951, it was
observed that practice of law generally involves the exercise of both the functions
of acting and pleading on behalf of a litigant party. When legislature confers
upon an advocate the right to practice in a court, it is legitimate to understand
that expression as authorizing him to appear and plead as well as to act on behalf
of suitors in that court. (Ashwini Kumar Ghose v. Arabinda Bose AIR 1952 SC 369)

(2) Rule of Reasonable Construction:

                                              According to this Rule, the words of a statute

 ut res magis valeat must be construed `ut res magis valeat quam
                                              pereat' meaning thereby that words of statute
                                              must be construed so as to lead to a sensible
                                              meaning. Generally, the words or phrases of a
                                              statute are to be given their ordinary meaning.
                                              It is only when the words of an enactment are
capable of two constructions that there is scope for interpretation or
                INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES        2.13  a

construction. Then, that interpretation, which furthers the object, can be preferred
to that which is likely to defeat or impair the policy or object.

Similarly, when the grammatical interpretation    Interpretatio fienda
leads to a manifest absurdity then the courts

shall interpret the statute so as to resolve the  est ut res magis
inconsistency and make the enactment a

consistent whole. This principle is based on the

rule that the words of a statute must be

construed reasonably so as to give effect to the enactment rather than reduce it

to a futility. This principle is contained in the Latin maxim, Interpretatio fienda

est ut res magis valeat quam pereat. In short, Statutes should be construed

grammatically.

Thus, when grammatical interpretation leads to certain absurdity, it is permissible
to depart there from and to interpret the provision of the statutes in a manner so
as to avoid that absurdity. This departure from the grammatical construction is
permissible only to the extent it avoids such absurdity and no further. This is also
called the Golden Rule of Interpretation.

Thus, if the Court finds that giving a plain meaning to the words will not be a fair
or reasonable construction, it becomes the duty of the court to depart from the
dictionary meaning and adopt the construction which will advance the remedy
and suppress the mischief provided the Court does not have to resort to
conjecture or surmise. A reasonable construction will be adopted in accordance
with the policy and object of the statute.

(3) Rule of Harmonious Construction:

It is a recognized rule of interpretation of statutes and deeds that the expressions
used therein should ordinarily be understood in a sense in which they best
harmonize with the object of the statute. The opposite of "harmony" is conflict.
Thus, this rule is applied when there is a conflict between two provisions of a
statute. Similarly, this Rule comes to our aid when there is conflict between the
provisions of a statute and the object, which the legislature had in view.

Thus, where an expression is susceptible of a narrow or technical meaning, as well
as a popular meaning, the court would be justified in assuming that the
legislature used the expression in the sense, which would carry out its objects and
a           2.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

reject that which renders it invalid. (New India Sugar Mills Ltd., v. Commissioner,
Sales Tax)

It is a basic rule of interpretation that if it is  generalia
possible to avoid a conflict between two

provisions on a proper construction thereof,        specialibus non
then it is the duty of the court to so construe

them that they are in harmony with each

other. The statute must be read as a whole

and every provision in the statute must be construed with reference to the

context and other clauses in the statute so as to make the statute a consistent

enactment and not reduce it to a futility. But where it is not possible to give effect

to both the provisions harmoniously, collision may be avoided by holding that

one section which is in conflict with another merely provides for an exception or a

specific rule different from the general rule contained in the other. A specific

rule will override a general rule. This principle is usually expressed by the

maxim, "generalia specialibus non derogant".

But remember that this rule can be adopted only when there is a real and not
merely apparent conflict between provisions, where the words of a statute, on a
reasonable construction thereof, admit of one meaning only then such natural
meaning will prevail. The court shall not attempt an interpretation based on
equity and harmonious construction.

In some cases, the statute may give a clear indication as to which provision is
subservient and which overrides. This is done by the use of the terms "subject
to", "notwithstanding" and "without prejudice".

Subject to

The impact of the words "subject to" when used in a provision is that when the
same subject matter is covered by that provision and by another provision or
enactment subject to which it operates and there is a conflict between them, then
the latter will prevail over the former. This limitation cannot operate, when the
subject matter of the two provisions is not the same. Thus, a clause that uses the
words "subject to" is subservient to another.
            INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES                  2.15   a

Example 3: Section 13(2) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Any change in the name
of a company shall be subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 4 and shall not have effect except with the approval of the Central
Government in writing."

This implies that the any change in the name of the company has to in
accordance with the provisions of the section 4(2) and section 4(3) of the
Companies Act, 2013.

Notwithstanding

A clause that begins with the words
"notwithstanding anything contained" is called a
non-obstante clause. Unlike the "subject to" clause, the notwithstanding clause
has the effect of making the provision prevail over others. When this term is used
then the clause will prevail over the other provision(s) mentioned therein. (K.
Parasurammaiah v. Pakari Lakshman AIR 1965 AP 220)

Example 4: A notwithstanding clause can operate at four levels.

Clause                Effect                          Example

1. Notwithstanding any The clause will Section 42(11) of the

thing contained in    override such       Companies Act, 2013
                      other section(s) /
another section or    sub-section(s)      "(11)         Notwithstanding
sub­ section of that
statute.                                  anything contained in sub-
                                          section (9) and sub-section
                                          (10), any private placement

                                          issue not made in compliance

                                          of the provisions of sub-

                                          section (2) shall be deemed to

                                          be a public offer and all the

                                          provisions of this Act and the

                                          Securities           Contracts

                                          (Regulation) Act, 1956 and the

                                          Securities and Exchange Board

                                          of India Act, 1992 shall be

                                          applicable."

2. Notwithstanding    The clause will Section 8(8) of the Companies

anything contained in override the        Act, 2013

a statute.            entire enactment.
a         2.16         CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

                       "(8) ....... amalgamated with
                       another company registered
                       under this section and having
                       similar objects, then,
                       notwithstanding anything to
                       the contrary contained in this
                       Act, the Central Government
                       may, by order, provide for
                       such amalgamation to form a
                       single company with such
                       constitution......"

3. Notwithstanding     The clause will (i) Section 7A of the Securities

anything contained in prevail over the Contracts (Regulation) Act,

specific section(s) or other enactment. 1956

sub-section(s) or all  "...and on such publication,

the       provisions   the rules as approved by the

contained in another   Central Government shall be

statute.               deemed to have been validly

                       made                   notwithstanding

                       anything contained in the

                       Companies Act, 1956."

                       (ii) Section 183 of the
                       Companies Act, 2013

                       "183(1) The Board of Directors
                       of any company or any person

                       or authority exercising the
                       powers of the Board of

                       Directors of a company, or of
                       the company in general

                       meeting,                       may,
                       notwithstanding           anything

                       contained in sections 180, 181
                       and section 182 or any other

                       provision of this Act or in the
                       memorandum, articles or any

                       other instrument relating to
                       the company, contribute such

                       amount as it thinks fit to the
                       National Defence Fund or any
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES                          2.17  a

                             other Fund approved by the
                             Central Government for the
                             purpose of national defence."

4. Notwithstanding    The clause will (i) Section 8 of the Securities

anything contained in override all other Contracts  (Regulation)

any other law for the laws.  Act,1956

time being in force.         "... the rules so made are

                             amended                         shall,

                             notwithstanding anything to

                             the contrary contained in the

                             Companies Act, 1956, or in

                             any other law for the time
                             being in force, have effect...".

                             (ii) Section 243(1B) of the

                             Companies Act, 2013

                             "Notwithstanding anything
                             contained in any other
                             provisions of this Act, or any
                             other law for the time being in

                             force, or any contract,
                             memorandum or articles, on

                             the removal of a person from
                             the officer of a director or any
                             other officer connected with
                             the conduct and management
                             of the affairs of the company,
                             that person shall not be
                             entitled to, or be paid, any
                             compensation for the loss or
                             termination of officer."

Without prejudice

When certain particular provisions follow general provisions and when it is stated
that the particular provisions are without prejudice to those general provisions
the particular provisions would not restrict or circumscribe the operation and
generality of the preceding general provisions. In other words, the particular
provisions shall operate in addition to and not in derogation of the general
provisions.
a  2.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Example 5: Section 4(3) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Without prejudice to the
provisions of sub-section (2), a company shall not be registered with a name
which contains......"

This implies that while registering (and deciding) the name of the company [as
per section 4(3)], provisions of section 4(2) shall also be operative.

(4) The Rule in Heydon's Case or Mischief Rule:

Where the language used in a statute is capable of more than one interpretation,
the most firmly established rule for construction is the principle laid down in
Heydon's case.

The intention of this rule is always to make such construction as shall suppress
the mischief and advance the remedy according to the true intention of the
legislation.

In Heydon's case (1584 3 Co Rep 79 P. 637), it was laid down by the Barons of the
Exchequer that "for the true and sure interpretation of all Statutes in general, four
things are to be discerned and considered.

1. What was the law before the making of the act?

2. What was the defect, mischief, hardship caused by the earlier law?

3. How does the act of Parliament seek to resolve or cure the mischief or
       deficiency?

4. What are the true reasons for the remedy?

And then the courts shall make such construction as will suppress the mischief
and advance the remedy and suppress the subtle inventions and evasions for the
continuance of the mischief."

Thus, applying Heydon's case courts will be bound to look at the state of the law
at the time of the passing of the enactment and not only as it then stood, but
under previous Statutes too.

In India, in Kanai Lal Paramnidhi, 1957 S.C.A 1033, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
held that the observations made by the Chief Baron and Barons of the Exchequer
in Heydon's Case 1584 3 Co Rep. 79, have been so frequently cited with approval
by the courts administering provisions of welfare enactments that they have now
attained the status of a classic on the subject and their validity cannot be
challenged.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.19  a

But the mischief rule can be applied only if there is any ambiguity in the present
law. (CIT Vs. Sodra Devi, 1957 SC 823 at 832 ­ 835).

Example 6: Application of this mischief rule is also well-found in the construction
of section 2(d) of the Prize Competition Act, 1955. This section defines `prize
competition' as "any competition in which prizes are offered for the solution of
any puzzle based upon the building up arrangement, combination or permutation
of letters, words or figures". The issue was whether the Act applies to
competitions which involve substantial skill and are not in the nature of gambling.
Supreme Court, after referring to the previous state of law, to the mischief that
continued under that law and to the resolutions of various states under Article
252(1) authorizing Parliament to pass the Act has stated as follows: "having
regard to the history of the legislation, the declared object thereof and the
wording of the statute, we are of opinion that the competitions which are sought
to be controlled and regulated by the Act are only those competitions in which
success does not depend on any substantial degree of skill." (RMD
Chamarbaugwalla V. Union of India, AIR 1957 SC 628).

(5) Rule of Beneficial Construction:

This is strictly speaking not a rule but a method of interpreting a provision
liberally so as to give effect to the declared intention of the legislation. Beneficial
construction will be given to a statute, which brings into effect provisions for
improving the conditions of certain classes of people who are under privileged or
who have not been treated fairly in the past. In such cases it is permissible to give
an extended meaning to words or clauses in enactments. But this can only be
done when two constructions are reasonably possible and not when the words in
a statute are quite unequivocal.

(6) Rule of Exceptional Construction:

We have already seen that the words of a statute must be construed so as to give
a sensible meaning to them if possible. They ought to be construed ut res magis
valeat quam pereat.

In fact, Maxwell goes to the extent of stating, "notwithstanding the general rule
that full effect must be given to every word, yet if no sensible meaning can be
given to a word or phrase, or if it would defeat the real object of the enactment, it
may, or rather it should, be eliminated."
a  2.20  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

"And" and "Or"

"And" is a particle joining words and sentences and expressing the relation of
connection or addition. The word "and" is normally conjunctive. In its
conjunctive sense the word is used to conjoin words, clauses or sentences,
signifying that something is to follow in addition to that, which precedes.

The word "or" is a disjunctive particle that marks an alternative, generally
corresponding to "either", as "either this or that".

Can "and" be read as "or" and vice versa?

The word "and" is normally conjunctive, while "or" is disjunctive. But sometimes
"and" is read as "or" and vice versa to give effect to the manifest intention of the
legislature as disclosed from the context. (Municipal Council v. Bishandas
Nathumal AIR 1969 MP 147).

"And" may legitimately be construed as "or" when the intention of the legislature
is clear and when any other construction would tend to defeat such intention.
(Amulya Chandra Roy v. Pashupathi Nath AIR 1951 Cal 48).

Not only in Statutes but also in documents the two words "and" and "or" are
sometimes used synonymously and in the same sense. That would depend on the
context and meaning of other provisions in the same statute or document.
Similarly, where statements or stipulations are coupled by "and/or" they are to
read either disjunctively or conjunctively.

"May", "Must" and "Shall"

Let us first appreciate the distinction between mandatory and directory
provisions. Where the enactment or provision prescribes that the contemplated
action be taken without any option or discretion, then such statute or provision or
enactment will be called mandatory. Where, the acting authority is vested with
discretion, choice or judgment, the statute or provision will be called directory. In
deciding whether the statute is directory or mandatory, the question is whether
there is anything that makes it the duty of the person on whom the power is
conferred to exercise that power. If it is so then the Statute is a mandatory one;
otherwise it is directory.

The words `may', `shall', and `must' should initially be deemed to have been used
in their natural and ordinary sense.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.21  a

`May' signifies permission and implies that the authority has been allowed
discretion. "Shall" in the normal sense imports a command. `Must' is doubtlessly
a word of command. In all cases, however, the intention of the legislature will
guide the interpreter in his search of meaning.

The question as to whether a statute is mandatory depends upon the intent of the
legislature and not upon the language in which the intent is clothed.

 In cases where the normal significance of imperative and permissive terms
       leads to absurd, inconvenient or unreasonable results, they should be
       discarded.

 "May" though permissive sometimes has compulsory force and is to be read
       as shall. Although it is well ­ settled that ordinarily the word `may' is always
       used in a permissive sense, there may be circumstances where this word will
       have to be construed as having been used in a mandatory or compulsory
       sense.

Where the word `may' has been used as implying a requisite condition to be
fulfilled, the court will and ought to exercise the powers which it should and in
such a case the word `may' will have a compulsory force.

"May," observed Cotton, L.J., "can never mean `must' so long as the English
language retains its meaning; but it gives a power and then it may be a question,
in what case, when any authority or body has a power given to it by the word
`may' it becomes its duty to exercise that power." [In re Baker Nichols v. Baker
(1890) 44 Ch. D. 262].

"Shall" though mandatory is to be read as may.

It is well ­ settled that the use of the word `shall' does not always mean that the
enactment is obligatory or mandatory; it depends upon the context in which the
word `shall' occurs and the other circumstances.

The employment of the auxiliary verb `shall' is inconclusive and similarly the mere
absence of the imperative is not conclusive either.

The question whether any requirement is mandatory or directory has to be
decided not merely on the basis of any specific provision which, for instance, sets
out the consequences of the omission to observe the requirement, but on the
purpose for which the requirement has been enacted, particularly in the context
of the other provisions of the Act and the general scheme thereof. It would, inter
a  2.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

alia, depend on whether the requirement is insisted on as a protection, for the
safeguarding of the right of liberty of person or of property that the action might
involve.
(7) Rule of Ejusdem Generis:

                                         The term `ejusdem generis' means `of the same
                                         kind or species'. Simply stated, the rule is as
                                         follows:

Where specific words pertaining to a class or category or genus are followed
by general words, the general words shall be construed as limited to the
things of the same kind as those specified.

This rule applies when:

1. The statute contains an enumeration of specific words

2. The subject of enumeration constitutes a class or category;

3. That class or category is not exhausted by the enumeration

4. General terms follow the enumeration; and

5. There is no indication of a different legislative intent.

The rule of ejusdem generis is not an absolute rule of law but only a part of a
wider principle of construction and therefore this rule has no application where
the intention of the legislature is clear.
Exceptions:
1. If the preceding term is general, as well as that which follows this rule

       cannot be applied.
2. Where the particular words exhaust the whole genus.
3. Where the specific objects enumerated are essentially diverse in character.
4. Where there is an express intention of legislature that the general term shall

       not be read ejusdem generis the specific terms.
       · This rule has to be applied judiciously. This rule may be understood

               as an attempt to settle a conflict between specific and general words.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.23  a

· The fifth ground contained in Section 271 (e) of the Companies Act,
       2013 shall not be read ejusdem generis the earlier five although it is a
       general phrase following specific phrases.

· This is because the earlier grounds are essentially diverse in character.

Rule of Ejusdem Generis Applies when-

                                  Statute contains an enumeration of
                                                specific words

                               The subject of enumeration constitutes
                                             a class or category

                               That class or category is not exhausted
                                            by the enumeration

                               The general terms follow enumeration,
                                                       and

                                 There is no indication of a different
                                              legislative intent

(B) OTHER (SECONDARY) RULES OF INTERPRETATION

(1) Doctrine of Noscitur a Sociis

                                         Noscitur a Sociis means that when two or more

 Noscitur a Sociis words that are susceptible of analogous meaning,

                                         are coupled together they are understood to be
                                         used in their cognate sense. They take, as it were,
their colour from each other, that is the meaning of the more general word being
restricted to a sense analogous to that of the less general.
Examples of the principal of Noscitur a Sociis are as follows:
Fresh orange juice is not a fruit juice.

While dealing with a Purchase Tax Act, which used the expression "manufactured
beverages including fruit-juices and bottled waters and syrups".
a  2.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

It was held that the description `fruit juices' as occurring therein should be
construed in the context of the preceding words and that orange-juice
unsweetened and freshly pressed was not within the description. (Commissioners.
v. Savoy Hotel, (1966) 2 All. E.R. 299)

Private Dispensary of a doctor is not a commercial establishment

In dealing with the definition of commercial establishment in Section 2 (4) of the
Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948, which reads, "commercial
establishment means an establishment which carries on any business, trade or
profession", the word `profession' was construed with the associated words
`business' and `trade' and it was held that a private dispensary of a doctor was not
within the definition. (Dr. Devendra M. Surti v. State of Gujrat, A.I.R. 1969 SC 63)

(2) Doctrine of Contemporanea Expositio

This doctrine is based on the concept that a

statute or a document is to be interpreted    Contemporanea

by referring to the exposition it has received

from contemporary authority. The maxim Expositio est optima

"Contemporanea Expositio est optima et

fortissinia in lege" means "contemporaneous

exposition is the best and strongest in the

law." This means a law should be understood in the sense in which it was

understood at the time when it was passed.

         The maxim "optima legum interpres est consuetude"
         simply means, "Custom is the best interpreter of law".
         Thus, the court was influenced in its construction of a
         statute of Anne by the fact that it was that which had
         been generally considered as the true one for one
         hundred and sixty years. (Cox Vs. Leigh 43 LJQB 123).

But remember that this maxim is to be applied for construing ancient statutes, but
not to Acts that are comparatively modern.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES                         2.25      a

    4. INTERNAL AIDS TO INTERPRETATION/
          CONSTRUCTION

The various parts of an enactment enumerated below may be referred to while
interpreting or construing an enactment. They are referred to as internal aids to
interpretation and can be of immense help in interpreting/construing the
enactment or any of its parts.

                      Long Title

Read the                             Preamble
Statute as
 a Whole

 Schedules            Internal aids                Heading
Explanation                  to
                                                   Marginal
                      construction                   Notes

             Proviso                 Definitional
                                       Sections

                      Illustrations

(a) Long Title:

       An enactment would have what is known as a `Short Title' and also a `Long
       Title'. The `Short Title' merely identifies the enactment and is chosen merely
       for convenience, the `Long Title' on the other hand, describes the
       enactment and does not merely identify it.
a  2.26                          CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

It is now settled that the Long Title of an Act is a part of the Act. We can,
therefore, refer to it to ascertain the object, scope and purpose of the Act
and so is admissible as an aid to its construction.

Example 7: Full title of the Supreme Court Advocates (Practice in High
Courts) Act, 1951 specify that this is an Act to authorize Advocates of the
Supreme Court to practice as of right in any High Court.

So, the title of a statute is an important part of the Act and may be referred
to for the purpose of ascertaining its general scope and of throwing light on
its construction, although it cannot override the clear meaning of the
enactment. [Aswini kumar Ghose v. Arabinda Bose, AIR 1952 SC]

   Relevance                         Significance

expresses the scope, object and      can legitimately be used for
        purpose of the Act                      construing
          comprehensively
                                     does not over-ride the plain
                                          provision of the Act

the Preamble of a Statute is a part  Where if the wording of the statute
           of the enactment          gives rise to doubts as to its proper
                                     construction, the Preamble can and
                                     ought to be referred to in order to

                                      arrive at the proper construction.

(b) Preamble:

       The Preamble expresses the scope, object and purpose of the Act more
       comprehensively than the Long Title. The Preamble may recite the ground
       and the cause of making a statute and the evil which is sought to be
       remedied by it.

       Like the Long Tile, the Preamble of a Statute is a part of the enactment and
       can legitimately be used for construing it. However, the Preamble does not
       over-ride the plain provision of the Act but if the wording of the statute
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.27  a

       gives rise to doubts as to its proper construction, for example, where the
       words or phrase have more than one meaning and a doubt arises as to
       which of the two meanings is intended in the Act, the Preamble can and
       ought to be referred to in order to arrive at the proper construction.

       In short, the Preamble to an Act discloses the primary intention of the
       legislature but can only be brought in as an aid to construction if the
       language of the statute is not clear. However, it cannot override the
       provisions of the enactment.

       Example 8: Use of the word `may' in section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
       1955 provides that "a marriage may be solemnized between two Hindus....."
       has been construed to be mandatory in the sense that both parties to the
       marriage must be Hindus as defined in section 2 of the Act. It was held that
       a marriage between a Christian male and a Hindu female solemnized under
       the Hindu Marriage Act was void. This result was reached also having regard
       to the preamble of the Act which reads: `An Act to amend and codify the
       law relating to marriage among Hindus' [Gullipoli Sowria Raj v. Bandaru
       Pavani, (2009)1 SCC714]

(c) Heading and Title of a Chapter:

       If we glance through any Act, we would generally find that a number of its
       sections referring to a particular subject are grouped together, sometimes
       in the form of chapters, prefixed by headings and/or Titles. These Heading
       and Titles prefixed to sections or groups of sections can legitimately be
       referred to for the purpose of construing the enactment or its parts.

       The headings of different portions of a Statute can be referred to determine
       the sense of any doubtful expression in a section ranged under any
       particular heading.

       They cannot control the plain meaning of the words of the enactment
       though, they may, in some cases be looked at in the light of preamble if
       there is any ambiguity in the meaning of the sections on which they can
       throw light.

       It may be noted that headings may sometimes be referred to know the
       scope of a section in the same way as the preamble.
a  2.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       But a heading cannot control or override a section. (Official assignee v.
       chuni ram AIR 1933 BOM 51)

(d) Marginal Notes:

       Marginal notes are summaries and side notes often found at the side of a
       section or group of sections in an Act, purporting to sum up the effect of
       that section or sections.

       They are not a part of the enactment, for they were not present when the
       Act was passed in Parliament but inserted after the Act has been so passed.

       Hence, they are not an aid to construction.

       In C.I.T. v. Ahmedbhai Umarbhai & Co. (AIR 1950 SC 134 at 141), Patanjali
       Shastri, J., had declared: "Marginal notes in an Indian statute, as in an Act, of
       Parliament cannot be referred to for the purpose of construing the statute",
       and the same view has been taken in many other cases. Many cases show
       that reference to marginal notes may be permissible in exceptional cases for
       construing a section in a statute. [Deewan Singh v. Rajendra Pd. Ardevi,
       (2007)10 SCC, Sarabjit Rick Singh v. Union of India, (2008) 2 SCC]

       However, marginal notes appended to Articles of the Constitution have
       been held to be part of the Constitution as passed by the Constituent
       Assembly and therefore have been used in construing the Articles.

(e) Definitional Sections/ Interpretation Clauses:

       The legislature has the power to embody in a statute itself the definitions of
       its language and it is quite common to find in the Statutes `definitions' of
       certain words and expressions used in the body of the statute.

       When a word or phrase is defined as having a particular meaning in the
       enactment, it is that meaning alone which must be given to it in interpreting
       a Section of the Act unless there be anything repugnant in the context. This
       is called an exhaustive definition. The Court cannot ignore an exhaustive
       statutory definition and try and extract what it considers to be the true
       meaning of the expression independently of it.

       The purpose of a definition clause is two-fold: (i) to provide a key to the
       proper interpretation of the enactment, and (ii) to shorten the language of
       the enacting part by avoiding repetition of the same words contained in the
       definition part every time the legislature wants to refer to the expressions
       contained in the definition.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES       2.29  a

to provide a key to the proper   to shorten the language of the
interpretation of the enactment      enacting part by avoiding

                                  repetition of the same words
                                 contained in the definition part.

Construction of definitions may be understood under the following
headings:

(i) Restrictive and extensive definitions

(ii) Ambiguous definitions

(iii) Definitions subject to a contrary context

(i) Restrictive and extensive definitions: The definition of a word or
       expression in the definition section may either be restricting of its
       ordinary meaning or may be extensive of the same.

       When a word is defined to `mean' such and such, the definition is
       `prima facie' restrictive and exhaustive we must restrict the meaning of
       the word to that given in the definition section.

       But where the word is defined to `include' such and such, the
       definition is `prima facie' extensive: here the word defined is not
       restricted to the meaning assigned to it but has extensive meaning
       which also includes the meaning assigned to it in the definition
       section.

       We may also find a word being defined as `means and includes' such
       and such. In this case, the definition would be exhaustive.

       On the other hand, if the word is defined `to apply to and include',
       the definition is understood as extensive.

       Example 9: The usage of word `any' in the definition connotes
       extension for `any' is a word of every wide meaning and prima facie
       the use of it excludes limitation.
a  2.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       It has been a universally accepted principle that where an expression
       is defined in an Act, it must be taken to have, throughout the Act, the
       meaning assigned to it by the definition, unless by doing so any
       repugnancy is created in the subject or context.

       Example 10: Inclusive definition of lease given under section 2(16)(c)
       of the Stamp Act, 1899 has been widely construed to cover transaction
       for the purpose of Stamp Act which may not amount to a lease under
       section 105 of the Transfer of property Act, 1882. [State of
       Uttarakhand v. Harpal Singh Rawat, (2011) 4 SCC 575]

       Section 2(m) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 contains an inclusive
       definition of `person'. It has been held to include a `company' although
       it is not specifically named therein [Karnataka Power Transmission
       Corporation v. Ashok Iron Works Pvt. Ltd., (2009)3 SCC 240]

       A definition section may also be worded as `is deemed to include'
       which again is an inclusive or extensive definition as such a words are
       used to bring in by a legal fiction something within the word defined
       which according to its ordinary meaning is not included within it.

       Example 11: If A is deemed to be B, compliance with A is in law
       compliance with B and contravention of A is in law contravention of B.

(ii) Ambiguous definitions: Sometime, we may find that the definition
       section may itself be ambiguous, and so it may have to be interpreted
       in the light of the other provisions of the Act and having regard to the
       ordinary meaning of the word defined. Such type of definition is not
       to be read in isolation. It must be read in the context of the phrase
       which it defines, realising that the function of a definition is to give
       accuracy and certainty to a word or phrase which would otherwise be
       vague and uncertain but not to contradict it or depose it altogether.

       Example 12: Termination of service of a seasonal worker after the
       work was over does not amount to retrenchment as per the Industrial
       Disputes Act, 1947. [Anil Bapurao Karase v. Krishna Sahkari Sakhar
       Karkhana, AIR 1997 SC 2698]. But the termination of employment of a
       daily wager who is engaged in a project, on completion of the project
       will amount to retrenchment if the worker had not been told when
       employed that his employment will end on completion of the project.
       [S.M. Nilajkarv Telecom District Manager Karnataka, (2003)4 SCC].
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.31  a

       (iii) Definitions subject to a contrary context: When a word is defined to
               bear a number of inclusive meanings, the sense in which the word is
               used in a particular provision must be ascertained from the context of
               the scheme of the Act, the language of the provision and the object
               intended to be served thereby.

(f) Illustrations:

       We would find that many, though not all, sections have illustrations
       appended to them. These illustrations follow the text of the Sections and,
       therefore, do not form a part of the Sections. However, illustrations do form
       a part of the statute and are considered to be of relevance and value in
       construing the text of the sections. However, illustrations cannot have the
       effect of modifying the language of the section and can neither curtail nor
       expand the ambit of the section.

       Example 13: In holding that section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
       does not permit the award of interest as damages for mere detention of
       debt, the privy Council rejected the argument that illustration given in the
       Act can be used for arriving at a contrary result. It was observed that nor
       can an illustration have the effect of modifying the language of the section
       which alone forms the enactment.

(g) Proviso:

       The normal function of a proviso is to except something out of the
       enactment or to qualify something stated in the enactment which would be
       within its purview if the proviso were not there. Usually, a proviso is
       embedded in the main body of the section and becomes an integral part of
       it. Provisos that are so included begin with the words, "provided that". The
       effect of the proviso is to qualify the preceding enactment which is
       expressed in terms which are too general. As a general rule, a proviso is
       added to an enactment to qualify or create an exception to what is in the
       enactment. Ordinarily a proviso is not interpreted as stating a general rule.

       · Exception clauses are intended to restrain the enacting clause to
               particular cases.

       · Savings clause is used to preserve from destruction certain rights,
               remedies, or privileges already existing.
a  2.32                     CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

It is a cardinal rule of interpretation that a proviso or exception to a
particular provision of a statute only embraces the field which is covered by
the main provision. It carves out an exception to the main provision to
which it has been enacted as a proviso and to no other. (Ram Narain Sons
Ltd. vs. Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, AIR 1955 SC 765).

   Distinction between Proviso, exception and saving Clause

`Exception' is intended to  `Proviso' is used to remove  `Saving clause' is used to
   restrain the enacting    special cases from general   preserve from destruction
                            enactment and provide for    certain rights, remedies or
clause to particular cases                               privileges already existing
                                    them specially

(h) Explanation:
       An Explanation is at times appended to a section to explain the meaning of
       certain words or phrases used in the section or of the purport of the section.
       An Explanation may be added to include something within the section or to
       exclude something from it. An Explanation should normally be so read as to
       harmonise with and clear up any ambiguity in the main section. It should
       not be so construed as to widen the ambit of the section.
       In Sundaram Pillai v. Pattabiraman, Fazal Ali, J. gathered the following
       objects of an explanation to a statutory provision:

            Explain the meaning and intendment of the Act itself

            Clarify any obscurity and vagueness (if any) in the main
            enactment to make it consistent with the object

            Provide an additional support to the object of the Act to
            make it meaningful and purposeful

            Fill up the gap which is relevant for the purpose of the
            explanation to suppress the mischief and advance the
            object of the Act

            Cannot take away a statutory right
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.33  a

       However, it would be wrong to always construe an explanation as limited to
       the aforesaid objects. The meaning to be given to an explanation will really
       depend upon its terms and not on any theory of its purpose.

(i) Schedules:

       The Schedules form part of an Act. Therefore, they must be read together
       with the Act for all purposes of construction. However, the expressions in
       the Schedule cannot control or prevail over the expression in the
       enactment. If there appears to be any inconsistency between the schedule
       and the enactment, the enactment shall always prevail. They often contain
       details and forms for working out the policy underlying the sections of the
       statute for example schedules appended to the Companies Act, 2013, to
       the Constitution of India.

(j) `Read the Statute as a Whole':

       It is the elementary principle that construction of a statute is to be made of
       all its parts taken together and not of one part only. The deed must be read
       as a whole in order to ascertain the true meaning of its several clauses, and
       the words of each clause should be so interpreted as to bring them into
       harmony with other provisions ­ if that interpretation does no violence to
       the meaning of which they are naturally susceptible. And the same
       approach would apply with equal force with regard to Acts and Rules
       passed by the legislature.

       One of the safest guides to the construction of sweeping general words is
       to examine other words of like import in the same enactment or instrument
       to see what limitations must be imposed on them. If we find that a number
       of such expressions have to be subjected to limitations and qualifications
       and that such limitations and qualifications are of the same nature,that
       circumstance forms a strong argument for subjecting the expression in
       dispute to a similar limitation and qualification.

       Example 14: If one section of an Act requires `notice' should be given, then
       a verbal notice would generally be sufficient. But, if another section
       provides that `notice' should be `served' on the person or `left' with him, or
       in a particular manner or place, then it would obviously indicate that a
       written notice was intended.
a           2.34           CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

    5. EXTERNAL AIDS TO INTERPRETATION/
          CONSTRUCTION

Society does not function in a void. Everything done has its reasons, its
background, the particular circumstances prevailing at the time, and so on. These
factors apply to enactments as well. These factors are of great help in
interpreting/construing an Act and have been given the convenient nomenclature
of `External Aids to Interpretation'. Apart from the statute itself there are many
matters which may be taken into account when the statute is ambiguous. These
matters are called external aids. Some of these factors are enumerated below:

                           External Aids

Historical  Consolidating  Usage   Earlier &  Dictionary     Use of
 Setting      Statutes &          Later Acts  Definitions   Foreign
                                                           Decisions
            Previous Law              and
                                  Analogous

                                      Acts

(a) Historical Setting:

       The history of the external circumstances which led to the enactment in
       question is of much significance in construing any enactment. We have, for
       this purpose, to take help from all those external or historical facts which
       are necessary in the understanding and comprehension of the subject
       matter and the scope and object of the enactment. History in general and
       Parliamentary History in particular, ancient statutes, contemporary or other
       authentic works and writings all are relevant in interpreting and construing
       an Act. We have also to consider whether the statute in question was
       intended to alter the law or leave it where it stood before.

(b) Consolidating Statutes & Previous Law:

       The Preambles to many Statutes contain expressions such as "An Act to
       consolidate" the previous law, etc. In such a case, the Courts may stick to
       the presumption that it is not intended to alter the law. They may solve
       doubtful points in the statute with the aid of such presumption in intention,
       rejecting the literal construction.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.35  a

(c) Usage:

       Usage is also sometimes taken into consideration in construing an Act. The
       acts done under a statute provide quite often the key to the statute itself. It
       is well known that where the meaning of the language in a statute is
       doubtful, usage ­ how that language has been interpreted and acted upon
       over a long period ­ may determine its true meaning. It has been
       emphasized that when a legislative measure of doubtful meaning has, for
       several years, received an interpretation which has generally been acted
       upon by the public, the Courts should be very unwilling to change that
       interpretation, unless they see cogent reasons for doing so.

(d) Earlier & Later Acts and Analogous Acts:

        Exposition of One Act by Language of Another:

       The general principle is that where there are different Statutes in `pari
       materia' (i.e. in an analogous case), though made at different times, or even
       expired and not referring to each other, they shall be taken and construed
       together as one system and as explanatory of each other.

       If two Acts are to be read together then every part of each Act has to be
       construed as if contained in one composite Act. But if there is some clear
       discrepancy then such a discrepancy may render it necessary to hold the
       later Act (in point of time) had modified the earlier one. However, this does
       not mean that every word in the later Act is to be interpreted in the same
       way as in the earlier Act.

       Where the later of the two Acts provides that the earlier Act should, so far
       as consistent, be construed as one with it then an enactment in the later
       statute that nothing therein should include debentures was held to exclude
       debentures from the earlier statute as well.

       Where a single section of one Act (say, Act `A') is incorporated into another
       statute (say Act `B'), it must be read in the sense which it bore in the original
       Act from which it is taken consequently, it would be legitimate to refer to all
       the rest of Act `A' to ascertain what that Section means, though one Section
       alone is incorporated in the new Act (Act `B').

       Suppose the earlier bye-law limited the appointment of the chairman of an
       organisation to a person possessed of certain qualifications and the later
a  2.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       bye-law authorises the election of any person to be the chairman of the
       organisation. In such a case, the later bye-law would be so construed as to
       harmonise and not to conflict with the earlier bye-law: the expression `any
       person' used in the later bye-law would be understood to mean only any
       eligible person who has the requisite qualifications as provided in the earlier
       bye-law.

        Earlier Act Explained by the Later Act:
               Not only may the later Act be construed in
               the light of the earlier Act but it (the later
               Act) sometimes furnishes a legislative interpretation of the earlier one, if
               it is `pari materia' and if, but only if, the provisions of the earlier Act are
               ambiguous.

               Where the earlier statute contained a negative provision but the later
               one merely omits that negative provision. This cannot by itself have
               the result of substantive affirmation. In such a situation, it would be
               necessary to see how the law would have stood without the original
               provision and the terms in which the repealed sections are re-enacted.

        Reference to Repealed Act: Where a part of an Act has been repealed, it
               loses its operative force. Nevertheless, such a repealed part of the Act
               may still be taken into account for construing the un-repealed part. This
               is so because it is part of the history of the new Act.

(e) Dictionary Definitions:

       First we have to refer to the Act in question to find out if any particular
       word or expression is defined in it. Where we find that a word is not defined
       in the Act itself, we may refer to dictionaries to find out the general sense in
       which that word is commonly understood. However, in selecting one out of
       the several meanings of a word, we must always take into consideration the
       context in which it is used in the Act. It is the fundamental rule that the
       meanings of words and expressions used in an Act must take their colour
       from the context in which they appear. Further, judicial decisions laying
       down the meaning of words in construing Statutes in `pari materia' will have
       greater weight than the meaning furnished by dictionaries. However, for
       technical terms reference may be made to technical dictionaries.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.37  a

(f) Use of Foreign Decisions:

       Foreign decisions of countries following the same system of jurisprudence
       as ours and given on laws similar to ours can be legitimately used for
       construing our own Acts. However, prime importance is always to be given
       to the language of the Indian statute. Further, where guidance can be
       obtained from Indian decisions, reference to foreign decisions may become
       unnecessary.

    6. RULES OF INTERPRETATION/ CONSTRUCTION
           OF DEEDS AND DOCUMENTS

The first and foremost point that has to be borne in mind is that one has to find
out what a reasonable man, who has taken care to inform himself of the
surrounding circumstances of a deed or a document, and of its scope and
intendments, would understand by the words used in that deed or document. The
principle of construction in case of a document and a deed, as of statute, does
not differ so much except in some minor details. A deed must be read as a whole
in order to ascertain the true meaning of its several clauses and the words of each
clause should be so interpreted as to bring them in harmony with other
provisions if that interpretation does no violence to the meaning of which they
are naturally susceptible. ­ Lord Watson. In all cases endeavour shall be made to
find out how a reasonable and well-informed person would understand by the
words used in the deed or document.

The golden rule of construction is to ascertain the intention of the parties to
the instrument after considering all the words in their ordinary, natural
sense. To ascertain this intention the Court has to consider the relevant portion
of the document as a whole and also to take into account the circumstances
under which the particular words were used. Very often the status and the
training of the parties using the words have to be taken into consideration.

It has to be borne in mind that very many words are used in more than one sense
and that sense differs in different circumstances. Again, even where a particular
word has to a trained conveyancer a clear and definite significance and one can
be sure about the sense in which such conveyancer would use it, it may not be
reasonable and proper to give the same strict interpretation of the word when
a  2.38  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

used by one who is not so equally skilled in the art of conveyancing.
(Ramkishorelal v. Kamalnarayan, 1963 (Sup.) 2 S.C. R. 417).

It is inexpedient to construe the terms of one deed by reference to the terms of
another. (Nirmala Bala Ghose v. Balai Chand Ghose (1965) 2 S.C. W.R. 988). It is an
elementary rule of construction that the same word cannot have two different
meanings in the same document, unless the context compels the adoption of
such a course. (Kultar Singh v. Mukhtiar Singh, 1964, 7 S.C.R. 790). The document
must be read as a whole and the intention deduced therefrom as to what the
actual term the parties intended to agree.

It may also happen that there is a conflict between two or more clauses of the
same document. An effort must be made to resolve the conflict by interpreting
the clauses so that all the clauses are given effect to. If, however, it is not possible
to give effect to all of them, then it is the earlier clause that will over-ride the
latter one.

Similarly, if one part of the document is in conflict with another part, an attempt
should always be made to read the two parts of the document harmoniously, if
possible. If that is not possible, then the earlier part will prevail over the latter one
which should, therefore, be disregarded.

SUMMARY

Enacted laws, Acts and Rules are drafted by legal experts and so it is expected
that the language used will leave little room for interpretation of construction.
Interpretation or construction of Statutes helps in finding of the meaning of
ambiguous words and expressions given in the Statutes and resolving
inconsistency lying therein. If any provision of the statute is open to two
interpretations, the Court has to choose that interpretation which represents the
true intention of the legislature. The best interpretation of Statutes is possible by
adoption of various guiding rules of construction and aids to construction of
Statutes. The courts are the best interpreters. They strongly lean against a
construction which reduces the statute to a futility. A statute or any enacting
provision therein must be so construed as to make it effective and operative on
the principle expressed in the maxim: ut res magis valeat quam pereat.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.39  a

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQ based Questions

1. The Rule in Heydon's case is also known as--
       (a) Purposive construction
       (b) Mischief Rule
       (c) Golden Rule
       (d) Exceptional Construction

2. Pick the odd one out of the following aids to interpretation--
       (a) Preamble
       (b) Marginal Notes
       (c) Proviso
       (d) Usage

3. ______________ is the cardinal rule of construction that words, sentences and
       phrases of a statute should be read in their ordinary, natural and
       grammatical meaning so that they may have effect in their widest amplitude.
       (a) Rule of Literal Construction
       (b) Rule of Harmonious Construction
       (c) Rule of Beneficial Construction
       (d) Rule of Exceptional Construction

4. An internal aid that may be added to include something within the section or
       to exclude something from it, is--
       (a) Proviso
       (b) Explanation
       (c) Schedule
       (d) Illustrations
a    2.40                 CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

5. When there is a conflict between two or more statues or two or more parts of
       a statute then which rule is applicable:

(a)  Welfare construction

(b)  Strict construction

(c)  Harmonious construction

(d)  Mischief Rule

Descriptive Questions

1. Explain the rule in `Heydon's Case' while interpreting the Statutes quoting an
       example.

2. Explain the principles of "Grammatical Interpretation" and "Logical
       Interpretation" of a Statute. What are the duties of a court in this regard?

3. (i) What is the effect of proviso? Does it qualify the main provisions of an
               Enactment?

       (ii) Does an explanation added to a section widen the ambit of a section?

4. Gaurav Textile Company Limited has entered into a contract with a Company.
       You are invited to read and interpret the document of contract. What rules of
       interpretation of deeds and documents would you apply while doing so?

5. How will you interpret the definitions in a statute, if the following words are
       used in a statute?

       (i) Means

       (ii) Includes

       Give one illustration for each of the above from Statutes you are familiar
       with.

6. Differentiate Mandatory Provision from a Directory Provision. What factors
       decide whether a provision is directory or mandatory?

7. Define Grammatical Interpretation. What are the exceptions to grammatical
       interpretation?

8. When can the Preamble be used as an aid to interpretation of a statute?
         INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES   2.41  a

9. Explain how 'Dictionary Definitions' can be of great help in interpreting/
       constructing an Act when the statute is ambiguous.

10. Preamble does not over-ride the plain provision of the Act. Comment. Also
       give suitable example.

11. At the time of interpreting a Statute what will be the effect of `Usage' or
       `customs and Practices'?

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.  (b) Mischief Rule

2.  (d) Usage

3.  (a) Rule of Literal Construction

4.  (b) Explanation

5.  (c) Harmonious construction

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. Where the language used in a statute is capable of more than one
       interpretation, the most firmly established rule for construction is the
       principle laid down in the Heydon's case. This rule enables, consideration of
       four matters in constituting an Act:

       (1) what was the law before making of the Act,

       (2) what was the mischief or defect for which the law did not provide,

       (3) what is the remedy that the Act has provided, and

       (4) what is the reason for the remedy.

       The rule then directs that the courts must adopt that construction which
       `shall suppress the mischief and advance the remedy'. Therefore, even in a
       case where the usual meaning of the language used falls short of the whole
       object of the legislature, a more extended meaning may be attributed to the
       words, provided they are fairly susceptible of it. If the object of any
       enactment is public safety, then its working must be interpreted widely to
a  2.42  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       give effect to that object. Thus, in the case of Workmen's Compensation Act,
       1923 the main object being provision of compensation to workmen, it was
       held that the Act ought to be so construed, as far as possible, so as to give
       effect to its primary provisions.

       However, it has been emphasized by the Supreme Court that the rule in
       Heydon's case is applicable only when the words used are ambiguous and
       are reasonably capable of more than one meaning [CIT v. Sodra Devi (1957)
       32 ITR 615 (SC)].

2. Principles of Grammatical Interpretation and Logical Interpretation: In
       order to ascertain the meaning of any law/ statute the principles of
       Grammatical and Logical Interpretation is applied to conclude the real
       meaning of the law and the intention of the legislature behind enacting it.

       Meaning: Grammatical interpretation concerns itself exclusively with the
       verbal expression of law. It does not go beyond the letter of the law,
       whereas Logical interpretation on the other hand, seeks more satisfactory
       evidence of the true intention of the legislature.

       Application of the principles in the court: In all ordinary cases, the
       grammatical interpretation is the sole form allowable. The court cannot
       delete or add to modify the letter of the law. However, where the letter of
       the law is logically defective on account of ambiguity, inconsistency or
       incompleteness, the court is under a duty to travel beyond the letter of law
       so as to determine the true intentions of the legislature. So that a statute is
       enforceable at law, however, unreasonable it may be. The duty of the court
       is to administer the law as it stands rather it is just or unreasonable.

       However, if there are two possible constructions of a clause, the courts may
       prefer the logical construction which emerges from the setting in which the
       clause appears and the circumstances in which it came to be enacted and
       also the words used therein.

3. (i) Normally a Proviso is added to a section of an Act to except something
               or qualify something stated in that particular section to which it is added.
               A proviso should not be, ordinarily, interpreted as a general rule. A
               proviso to a particular section carves out an exception to the main
               provision to which it has been enacted as a Proviso and to no other
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.43  a

               provision. [Ram Narian Sons Ltd. v. Commissioner of Sales Tax AIR (1955)
               S.C. 765]

       (ii) Sometimes an explanation is added to a section of an Act for the
               purpose of explaining the main provisions contained in that section. If
               there is some ambiguity in the provisions of the main section, the
               explanation is inserted to harmonise and clear up and ambiguity in
               the main section. Something may added be to or something may be
               excluded from the main provision by insertion of an explanation. But
               the explanation should not be construed to widen the ambit of the
               section.

4. The rules regarding interpretation of deeds and documents are as follows:

       First and the foremost point that has to be borne in mind is that one has to
       find out what reasonable man, who has taken care to inform himself of the
       surrounding circumstances of a deed or a document, and of its scope and
       intendments, would understand by the words used in that deed or
       document.

       It is inexpedient to construe the terms of one deed by reference to the
       terms of another. Further, it is well established that the same word cannot
       have two different meanings in the same documents, unless the context
       compels the adoption of such a rule.

       The Golden Rule is to ascertain the intention of the parties of the
       instrument after considering all the words in the documents/deed
       concerned in their ordinary, natural sense. For this purpose, the relevant
       portions of the document have to be considered as a whole. The
       circumstances in which the particular words have been used have also to be
       taken into account. Very often, the status and training of the parties using
       the words have also to be taken into account as the same words maybe
       used by an ordinary person in one sense and by a trained person or a
       specialist in quite another sense and a special sense. It has also to be
       considered that very many words are used in more than one sense. It may
       happen that the same word understood in one sense will give effect to all
       the clauses in the deed while taken in another sense might render one or
       more of the clauses ineffective. In such a case the word should be
       understood in the former and not in the latter sense.
a  2.44  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       It may also happen that there Is a conflict between two or more clauses of
       the same documents. An effect must be made to resolve the conflict by
       interpreting the clauses so that all the clauses are given effect. If, however, it
       is not possible to give effect of all of them, then it is the earlier clause that
       will override the latter one.

5. Interpretation of the words "Means" and "Includes" in the definitions-
       The definition of a word or expression in the definition section may either
       be restricting of its ordinary meaning or may be extensive of the same.

       When a word is defined to `mean' such and such, the definition is `prima
       facie' restrictive and exhaustive, we must restrict the meaning of the word to
       that given in the definition section.

       But where the word is defined to `include' such and such, the definition is
       `prima facie' extensive, here the word defined is not restricted to the
       meaning assigned to it but has extensive meaning which also includes the
       meaning assigned to it in the definition section.

       Example--

       Definition of Director [section 2(34) of the Companies Act, 2013]--Director
       means a director appointed to the board of a company. The word "means"
       suggests exhaustive definition.

       Definition of Whole time director [Section 2(94) of the Companies Act,
       2013]--Whole time director includes a director in the whole time
       employment of the company. The word "includes" suggests extensive
       definition. Other directors may be included in the category of the whole
       time director.

6. Practically speaking, the distinction between a provision which is
       `mandatory' and one which is `directory' is that when it is mandatory, it must
       be strictly observed; when it is `directory' it would be sufficient that it is
       substantially complied with. However, we have to look to the substance and
       not merely the form, an enactment in mandatory form might substantially
       be directory and, conversely, a statute in directory form may in substance be
       mandatory. Hence, it is the substance that counts and must take precedence
       over mere form. If a provision gives a power coupled with a duty, it is
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.45  a

       mandatory: whether it is or is not so would depend on such consideration
       as:

       · the nature of the thing empowered to be done,

       · the object for which it is done, and

       · the person for whose benefit the power is to be exercised.

7. Grammatical Interpretation and its exceptions: `Grammatical
       interpretation' concerns itself exclusively with the verbal expression of the
       law, it does not go beyond the letter of the law. In all ordinary cases,
       `grammatical interpretation' is the sole form allowable. The Court cannot
       take from or add to modify the letter of the law.

       This rule, however, is subject to some exceptions:

       (i) Where the letter of the law is logically defective on account of
               ambiguity, inconsistency or incompleteness. As regard the defect to
               ambiguity, the Court is under a duty to travel beyond the letter of the
               law so as to determine from the other sources the true intention of
               the legislature. In the case of the statutory expression being defective
               on account of inconsistency, the court must ascertain the spirit of the
               law.

       (ii) If the text leads to a result which is so unreasonable that it is self-
               evident that the legislature could not mean what it says, the court may
               resolve such impasse by inferring logically the intention of the
               legislature.

8. While the Preamble can be used to know the aims and objects of the
       legislation it cannot be used to control or qualify the precise and
       unambiguous language of an enactment. The preamble is the key to the
       mind of the maker of the law, but it cannot override in order to enlarge or
       restrict the enacting provision of the Act. A provision contained in the Act
       cannot be considered as invalid because they do not accord with the
       preamble, which is only a brief summary of legislative objectives behind the
       Act, and if there is any conflict between the preamble and any provision of
       an Act, the provision prevails.
a  2.46  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       The preamble merely affords help in the matter of construction if there is
       any ambiguity. Where the language of the Act is clear, the court is bound to
       give it effect.

       When will courts refer to the preamble as an aid to construction?

       Situation 1: Where there is any ambiguity in the words of an enactment the
       assistance of the preamble may be taken to resolve the conflict.

       Situation 2: Where the words of an enactment appear to be too general in
       scope or application then courts may resort to the preamble to determine
       the scope or limited application for which the words are meant.

9. Dictionary Definitions: First we refer the Act in question to find out if any
       particular word or expression is defined in it. Where we find that a word is
       not defined in the Act itself, we may refer to dictionaries to find out the
       general sense in which that word is commonly understood. However, in
       selecting one out of the several meanings of a word, we must always take
       into consideration the context in which it is used in the Act. It is the
       fundamental rule that the meanings of words and expressions used in an
       Act must take their colour from the context in which they appear. Further,
       judicial decisions laying down the meaning of words in construing statutes
       in pari materia will have greater weight than the meaning furnished by
       dictionaries. However, for technical terms, reference may be made to
       technical dictionaries.

10. Preamble: The Preamble expresses the scope, object and purpose of the
       Act more comprehensively. The Preamble of a Statute is a part of the
       enactment and can legitimately be used as an internal aid for construing it.
       However, the Preamble does not over-ride the plain provision of the Act.
       But if the wording of the statute gives rise to doubts as to its proper
       construction, for example, where the words or phrase has more than one
       meaning and a doubt arises as to which of the two meanings is intended in
       the Act, the Preamble can and ought to be referred to in order to arrive at
       the proper construction.

       In short, the Preamble to an Act discloses the primary intention of the
       legislature but can only be brought in as an aid to construction if the
       language of the statute is not clear. However, it cannot override the
       provisions of the enactment.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  2.47  a

       Example: Use of the word `may' in section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
       provides that "a marriage may be solemnized between two Hindus....." has
       been construed to be mandatory in the sense that both parties to the
       marriage must be Hindus as defined in section 2 of the Act. It was held that
       a marriage between a Christian male and a Hindu female solemnized under
       the Hindu Marriage Act was void. This result was reached also having regard
       to the preamble of the Act which reads: `An Act to amend and codify the
       law relating to marriage among Hindus" [GullipoliSowria Raj v.
       BandaruPavani, (2009)1 SCC714].

11. Effect of usage: Usage or practice developed under the statute is indicative
       of the meaning recognized to its words by contemporary opinion. A uniform
       notorious practice continued under an old statute and inaction of the
       Legislature to amend the same are important factors to show that the
       practice so followed was based on correct understanding of the law. When
       the usage or practice receives judicial or legislative approval it gains
       additional weight.

       In this connection, we have to bear in mind two Latin maxims:

       (i) 'Optima Legum interpres est consuetude' (the custom is the best
               interpreter of the law); and

       (ii) `Contemporanea Expositio est optima et fortissinia in lege' (the best
               way to interpret a document is to read it as it would have been read
               when made).

       Therefore, the best interpretation/construction of a statute or any other
       document is that which has been made by the contemporary authority.
       Simply stated, old statutes and documents should be interpreted as they
       would have been at the time when they were enacted/written.

       Contemporary official statements throwing light on the construction of a
       statute and statutory instruments made under it have been used as
       contemporanea expositio to interpret not only ancient but even recent
       statutes in India.
