CHAPTER  a  3

THE FOREIGN
EXCHANGE
MANAGEMENT
ACT, 1999

                                      LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of this Chapter, you will be able to:
 Comprehend certain important terms and definitions under

      the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
 Gain knowledge about the concept of Residential Status

      under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
 Identify the meaning of Current and Capital Account

      Transactions and the Rules and Regulations governing them
a  3.2  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

        Definitions  FEMA, 1999

                        Regulation and Management of
                                  Foreign Exchange

                        Current    Capital Account
                       Account       Permissible
                     Transactions    Transactions

                     Schedule I    Schedule I

                     Schedule II   Schedule II

                     Schedule III

    1. INTRODUCTION

Need for the Act

The change in the economic scenario,
globalization of capital, free trade across the
globe, necessitated the need for managing
foreign exchange in the country in an orderly
manner. To facilitate cross border trade and cross
border capital flows, exchange control law was
required. Foreign exchange control led to
introduction of exchange control law through
Defense of India rules by the Britishers in 1939. Subsequently, Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act (FERA) was enacted in 1947 which was later replaced with 'the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973' (FERA).
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.3  a

Government as part of its agenda of liberalization of the Indian economy in 1991,
permitted free movement of foreign exchange in connection to trade related
receipts and payments as well as Foreign Investment in various sectors. This
increased the flow of foreign exchange to India and consequently foreign exchange
reserves increased substantially. The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 was
enacted and made effective from 1st June, 2000. This Act enables management of
foreign exchange reserves for the country.

Salient Features of the Act: It provides for-

 Regulation of transactions between residents and non-residents

 Investments in India by non-residents and overseas investments by Indian
       residents

 Freely permissible transactions on current account subject to reasonable
       restrictions that may be imposed

 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Central Government control over capital
       account transactions

 Requirement for realisation of export proceeds and repatriation to India

 Dealing in foreign exchange through 'Authorised Persons' like Authorised
       Dealer/ Money Changer/ Off-shore banking unit

 Adjudication and Compounding of Offences

 Investigation of offences by Directorate of Enforcement

 Appeal provisions including Special Director (Appeals) and Appellate
       Tribunal.

Enforcement of FEMA: Though RBI exercises overall control over foreign exchange
transactions, enforcement of FEMA has been entrusted to a separate 'Directorate
of Enforcement' formed for this purpose. [Section 36].
a  3.4         CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

How to Read FEMA:

          Act

               Rules* & Regulations**

                   Notifications & Circulars

                                       Master Directions

                                                          FAQs

*Rules are notified by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India
** Regulations are notified by the Reserve Bank of India

Broad Structure of FEMA

Now let us have a glance at the broad structure the Act. The Act consists of 7
Chapters dealing with following areas:

Chapters                                Matters                      Sections
      I   Preliminary                                                  1­2
     II   Regulation and Management of Foreign Exchange                3­9
     III  Authorised Person
     IV   Contravention and Penalties                                 10 ­ 12
     V    Adjudication and Appeal                                     13 ­ 15
     VI   Directorate of Enforcement                                  16 ­ 35
    VII   Miscellaneous                                               36 ­ 38
                                                                      39 ­ 49
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999                            3.5  a

    2. PREAMBLE, EXTENT, APPLICATION AND
          COMMENCEMENT OF FEMA, 1999

(A) Preamble: This Act aims to consolidate and amend the law relating to foreign
exchange with the objective of --

(i) facilitating external trade and payments and

(ii) for promoting the orderly development and maintenance of foreign
       exchange market in India.

(B) Extent and Application [Section 1]: FEMA, 1999 extends to the whole of
India. In addition, it shall also apply to all branches, offices and agencies outside
India owned or controlled by a person resident in India and also to any
contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person to whom this Act
applies.

The scope of the Act has been extended to include branches, offices and agencies
outside India. The scope is thus wide enough because the emphasis is on the words
"Owned or Controlled". Contravention of the FEMA committed outside India by a
person to whom this Act applies will also be covered by FEMA.

(C) Commencement: The Act, 1999 came into force with effect from 1stJune,
2000 vide Notification G.S.R. 371(E), dated 1.5.2000.

    3. DEFINITIONS [SECTION 2]

In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:

(1) "Authorised person" means an authorised dealer, money changer, off-shore
       banking unit or any other person for the time being authorised under section
       10(1) to deal in foreign exchange or foreign securities; [Section 2(c)]

(2) "Capital Account Transaction" means a transaction, which alters the assets or
       liabilities, including contingent liabilities, outside India of persons resident in
       India or assets or liability in India of persons resident outside India, and
       includes transactions referred to in 1Section 6(3); [Section 2(e)]

1 Section 6(3) has been deleted with effect from 15th October 2019.
a  3.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(3) "Currency" includes all currency notes, postal notes, postal orders, money
       orders, cheques, drafts, travelers' cheques, letters of credit, bills of exchange
       and promissory notes, credit cards or such other similar instruments, as may
       be notified by the Reserve Bank. [Section 2(h)]

(4) "Currency Notes" means and includes cash in the form of coins and bank
       notes; [Section 2(i)]

(5) "Current Account Transaction" means a transaction other than a capital
       account transaction and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
       such transaction includes,

       (i) payments due in connection with foreign trade, other current business,
               services, and short-term banking and credit facilities in the ordinary
               course of business.

       (ii) payments due as interest on loans and as net income from investments.

       (iii) remittances for living expenses of parents, spouse and children residing
               abroad, and

       (iv) expenses in connection with foreign travel, education and medical care
               of parents, spouse and children; [Section 2(j)]

(6) "Export", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means;

       (i) the taking out of India to a place outside India any goods.

       (ii) provision of services from India to any person outside India;[Section
               2(l)]

(7) "Foreign Currency" means any currency other than Indian currency; [Section
       2(m)]

(8) "Foreign Exchange" means foreign currency and includes:

       (i) deposits, credits and balances payable in any foreign currency,
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.7  a

       (ii) drafts, travelers' cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange,
               expressed or drawn in Indian currency but payable in any foreign
               currency,

       (iii) drafts, travelers' cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange drawn by
               banks, institutions or persons outside India, but payable in Indian
               currency; [Section 2(n)]

(9) "Foreign Security" means any security, in the form of shares, stocks, bonds,
       debentures or any other instrument denominated or expressed in foreign
       currency and includes securities expressed in foreign currency, but where
       redemption or any form of return such as interest or dividends is payable in
       Indian currency; [Section 2(o)]

(10) "Import", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
       bringing into India any goods or services; [Section 2(p)]

(11) "Person" includes:

       (i) an individual,

       (ii) a Hindu undivided family,

       (iii) a company,

       (iv) a firm,

       (v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
               incorporated or not,

       (vi) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding
               sub-clauses, and;

       (vii) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such person;
               [Section 2(u)]

(12) "Person resident in India" means:

       (i) a person residing in India for more than 182 days during the course of
               the preceding financial year but does not include--
a  3.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               (A) a person who has gone out of India or who stays outside India, in
                       either case--

                       (a) for or on taking up employment outside India, or

                       (b) for carrying on outside India a business or vocation
                               outside India, or

                       (c) for any other purpose, in such circumstances as would
                               indicate his intention to stay outside India for an uncertain
                               period;

               (B) a person who has come to or stays in India, in either case,
                       otherwise than:

                       (a) for or on taking up employment in India, or

                       (b) for carrying on in India a business or vocation in India, or

                       (c) for any other purpose, in such circumstances as would
                               indicate his intention to stay in India for an uncertain
                               period;

       (ii) any person or body corporate registered or incorporated in India,

       (iii) an office, branch or agency in India owned or controlled by a person
               resident outside India,

       (iv) an office, branch or agency outside India owned or controlled by a
               person resident in India; [Section 2(v)]

(13) "Person Resident Outside India" means a person who is not resident in India;
       [Section 2(w)]

(14) "Transfer" includes sale, purchase, exchange, mortgage, pledge, gift, loan or
       any other form of transfer of right, title, possession or lien. [Section 2(ze)]
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.9  a

    4. RESIDENTIAL STATUS UNDER FEMA, 1999

The definition of "person" is similar to the definition contained in the Income-tax
Act, 1961. The term `person' includes entities such as companies, firms, individuals,
HUF, Association of Persons (AOP), artificial juridical persons agencies, as well as
offices and branches. Agencies, offices and branches do not have independent
status separate from their owners. Yet these have been considered as persons.
Under FEMA such offices and branches are included in definition of Person Resident
in India. Therefore, they have been included in the definition of "Person".

The term `person resident in India' means the following entities:

1. A person who resides in India for more than 182 days during the
       preceding financial year;

       The following persons are NOT persons resident, in India even though they
       may have resided in India for more than 182 days.

       A. A person who has gone out of India or stays outside India for any of the
               three purposes given below,

       B. A person who has come to or stays in India OTHERWISE THAN for any
               of the three purposes given below;

               Three Purposes

               (i) For or on taking up Employment

               (ii) For carrying on a business or Vacation

               (iii) For any other purpose in such circumstances as would indicate
                       stay for an uncertain period.

2. Any person or body corporate registered or incorporated in India;

3. An office, branch or agency in India owned or controlled by a person resident
       outside India;

4. An office, branch or agency outside India owned or controlled by a person
       resident in India.
a  3.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Person resident outside India means a person who is not resident in India.

   During the relevant previous year did he reside in India for more than 182 days

         Yes                                      No

   Did he go out or stay outside         Did he come to or stay in
   India during the current year?      India during the current year?

         Yes                       No        Yes              No

              3                                   3
         Purposes                            Purposes

              ?                                   ?

   Yes                                 Yes
                      No                                  No

   PROI  PRII             PRII         PRII  PROI             PROI

As the definitions of Person Resident in India (PRII) and Person Resident outside
India (PROI) are quite relevant for determining the applicability of the Act on an
entity, let us analyse and understand it better.

In the case of individuals, to be considered as "resident", the person should have
resided in India in the preceding financial year for more than 182 days. Citizenship
is not the criteria for determining whether or not a person is resident in India.

There are three limbs in the definition. The first limb prescribes the number of days
stay. Then there are two limbs which are exceptions to the first limb.

First limb ­ It states that a person who is in India for more than 182 days in the
"preceding year" will be a Person Resident in India. Thus, at the threshold or basic
level, one has to consider the period of stay during the preceding year.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.11  a

Example 1: If a person resides in India for more than 182 days during FY 2020-21,
then for the FY 2021-22, the person will be an Indian resident. For FY 2020-21, one
will have to consider residence during FY 2019-20, and so on.

There are two exceptions provided in clauses (A) and (B). Clause (A) is for persons
going out of India. Clause (B) is for persons coming into India. Exceptions carve out
situations that do not fall under the main body of a section, even though they
satisfy the criteria. This means that even if a person is an Indian resident based on
the test provided in the first limb, the person will be a "Person Resident Outside
India (PROI) if he falls within limb (A) or limb (B).

Clause (A) ­ second limb ­ It states that if a person leaves India in any of the
THREE PURPOSES we saw above, he will not be a PRII. He will be a PROI.

Thus, in the example given for the first limb above, if a person leaves India on 1st
November 2021, he will be a non-resident from 2nd November 2021 ­ even though
his number of days in India was more than 182 days in FY 2020-2021. Similarly, if a
person goes and stays out of India for carrying on any business, he will be a PROI
from that date. For FY 2021-2022 the person will be a PRII till 1st November 2021.
He will then be a PROI. From 1st April 2022, the person will continue to be a PROI
as long as he stays out of India for employment.

An example for clause (iii) can be a person who has a green card in the USA. The
green card entitles a person to stay in the USA and eventually become a US citizen.
If a person goes abroad and starts staying in the USA, he will be a non-resident
from that date as his stay abroad indicates that he is going to stay there for an
uncertain period.

Clause (B) ­ third limb ­ This is a complex clause as first limb read with third limb
has two exceptions. Limb one uses the phrase "but does not include". Third limb
uses the phrase "otherwise than". Use of two exceptions make it complex reading.

It states that if a person has come to India for any reason otherwise than for -
employment, business or circumstances which indicate his intention to stay for
uncertain period ­ he will be a non-resident. This will be so even if the person has
stayed in India for more than 182 days in the preceding year.

For example, if a person comes to India on 1st June 2021 for visiting his parents.
However, his parents fall sick and he stays till 31st March 2022. Thereafter he
continues to stay in India. It is however certain that he will leave India in next 6
a  3.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

months when his parents recover. His stay in India is neither for employment, nor
for business, nor for circumstances which show that he will stay in India for an
uncertain period. In such a case, even if he has resided in India for more than 182
days in FY 2021-2022, he will continue to be a non-resident from 1st April 2022 also.
In FY 2021-2022, he is of course a PROI as he did not reside in India for more than
182 in FY 2020-2021.

If a person comes to India on 1st June 2021 for employment, business or
circumstances which indicate his intention to stay in India for an uncertain period,
he will be a PRII from 1st June 2021.

Residential status is not for a year. It is from a particular date. This is different from
income-tax law. Under income-tax law, a person has to pay tax in respect of the
income of the previous year. Therefore, it is possible to look at a complete year for
determining residential status under the Income Tax Act, 1961. FEMA is a regulatory
law. One has to know the person's status at the time of undertaking a transaction.
If for example, a person comes to India for employment, and if his status can be
known only when the year is completed, how will he and other people enter into
commercial transactions with each other? If he is considered as a PROI till the year
is over, then people will not be able to enter into transactions with him. This is the
reason why the residential status is not for a year but from particular date.

It is understood that this condition applies only to individuals. It will not apply
to HUF, AOP or artificial juridical person as they cannot get employed, cannot go
out of India or come to India. Hence, they do not come within the ambit of the
second and third limbs. These entities like HUF and AOP are not required to be
registered or incorporated like corporate entities nor the definition can be far
stretched to cover by applying the criteria of `owned or controlled'. Hence legally
the definition for HUF, AOP, BOI fail. Practically if the HUF, AOP etc. are in India,
they will be considered as Indian residents.

Person or Body corporate: Any person or body corporate registered or
incorporated in India, will be considered a PRII. This definition too, does not apply
to AOP, BOI etc.

Office, branch or agency: Any agency, branch or agency outside India but owned
or controlled by PRII will be considered as person resident in India (PRII). Thus,
one cannot set up a branch outside India and attempt to avoid FEMA provisions.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.13  a

Any agency, branch or agency in India but owned or controlled by a person
resident outside India (PROI) will be considered as a person resident in India. This
is relevant as Indian residents can deal with such branch in India without
considering FEMA. If such branch is considered as a PROI then it will be difficult to
undertake several transactions.

Illustration 1

Mr. X had resided in India during the financial year 2019-2020 for less than 182 days.
He had come to India on April 1, 2020 for carrying on business. He intends to leave
the business on April 30, 2021 and leave India on June 30, 2021. Determine his
residential status for the financial years 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 up to the date of
his departure?

Answer

As explained in the above illustration, Mr. X will be considered as a `person resident
in India' from 1st April 2020. As regards, financial year 2021-2022, Mr. X would
continue to be an Indian resident from 1st April 2021.

If he leaves India for the purpose of taking up employment or for business/vocation
outside India, or for any other purpose as would indicate his intention to stay
outside India for an uncertain period, he would cease to be person resident in India
from the date of his departure. It may be noted that even if Mr. X is a foreign citizen,
has not left India for any of these purposes, he would be considered, `person
resident in India' during the financial year 2021-2022. Thus, it is the purpose of
leaving India which will decide his status from 1st July 2021.

Illustration 2

Mr. Z had resided in India during the financial year 2019-2020. He left India on 1st
August, 2020 for United States for pursuing higher studies for three years. What
would be his residential status during financial year 2020-2021 and during 2021-
2022?

Answer

Mr. Z had resided in India during financial year 2019-2020 for more than 182 days.
After that he has gone to USA for higher studies. He has not gone out of or stayed
outside India for or on taking up employment, or for carrying a business or for any
other purpose, in circumstances as would indicate his intention to stay outside India
a  3.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

for an uncertain period. Accordingly, he would be `person resident in India' during
the financial year 2020-2021. RBI has however clarified in its AP circular no. 45 dated
8th December 2003, that students will be considered as non-residents. This is
because usually students start working there to take care of their stay and cost of
studies.

For the financial year 2021-2022, he would not have been in India in the preceding
financial year (2020-2021) for a period exceeding 182 days. Accordingly, he would
not be `person resident in India' during the financial year 2021-2022.

Illustration 3

Toy Ltd. is a Japanese company having several business units all over the world. It
has a robotic unit with its head quarters in Mumbai and has a branch in Singapore.
The Headquarters at Mumbai controls the Singapore branch of the robotic unit. What
would be the residential status of the robotic unit in Mumbai and that of the
Singapore branch?

Answer

Toy Ltd. being a Japanese company would be a person resident outside India.
[Section 2(w)]. Section 2(u) defines `person'. Under clause (viii) thereof person
would include any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such `person'.
The term such `person' appears to refer to a person who is included in clauses (i)
to (vi). Accordingly, robotic unit in Mumbai, being a branch of a company, would
be a `person'.

Section 2(v) defines `person resident in India'. Under clause (iii) thereof `person
resident in India' would include an office, branch or agency in India owned or
controlled by a person resident outside India. Robotic unit in Mumbai is owned or
controlled by a person `resident outside India'. Hence, it would be `person resident
in India'.

The robotic unit headquartered in Mumbai, which is a person resident in India as
discussed above, controls the Singapore branch, Hence, the Singapore branch is a
`person resident in India'.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.15  a

Illustration 4

Miss Alia is an airhostess with the British Airways. She flies for 12 days in a month
and thereafter takes a break for 18 days. During the break, she is accommodated in
`base', which is normally the city where the Airline is headquartered. However, for
security considerations, she was based at Mumbai. During the financial year, she was
accommodated at Mumbai for more than 182 days. What would be her residential
status under FEMA?

Answer

Miss Alia stayed in India at Mumbai `base' for more than 182 days in the preceding
financial year. She is however employed in UK. She has not come to India for
employment, business or circumstances which indicate her intention to stay for
uncertain period. Under section 2(v)(B), such persons are not considered as Indian
residents even if their stay exceeds 182 days in the preceding year. Thus, while Miss
Alia may have stayed in India for more than 182 days, she cannot be considered to
be a Person Resident in India.

If however she has been employed in Mumbai branch of British Airways, then she
will be considered a Person Resident in India.

    5. REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT OF
          FOREIGN EXCHANGE

 Dealing in foreign exchange, etc. [Section 3]

       No person shall-

       (a) deal in or transfer any foreign exchange or foreign security to any
               person not being an authorised person (AP);

       (b) make any payment to or for the credit of any person resident outside
               India in any manner;

       (c) receive otherwise than through an authorised person, any payment by
               order or on behalf of any person resident outside India in any manner.

               Explanation--For the purpose of this clause, where any person in, or
               resident in, India receives any payment by order or on behalf of any
               person resident outside India through any other person (including an
a  3.16  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               authorised person) without a corresponding inward remittance from
               any place outside India, then, such person shall be deemed to have
               received such payment otherwise than through an authorised person;

       (d) enter into any financial transaction in India as consideration for or in
               association with acquisition or creation or transfer of a right to acquire,
               any asset outside India by any person.

The above transactions may carried on:

(a) as otherwise provided in this Act; or

(b) with the general or special permission of the Reserve Bank.

Explanation -- For the purpose of this clause, "financial transaction" means
making any payment to, or for the credit of any person, or receiving any payment
for, by order or on behalf of any person, or drawing, issuing or negotiating any bill
of exchange or promissory note, or transferring any security or acknowledging any
debt.

This section imposes blanket restrictions on the specified transactions. This section
applies to PRIIs and PROIs. The purpose of this section is to regulate inflow and
outflow of Foreign Exchange through Authorised dealers and in a permitted
manner.

Consider following examples:

(i) Example pertaining to clause (a)- Dealing in foreign exchange ­ A PROI
       comes to India and would like to sell US$ 1,000 to his friend who is resident
       in India. The friend offers him a rate better than the banks. This cannot be
       done as it would amount to dealing in foreign exchange.

(ii) Example pertaining to clause (b) ­ A PROI has an insurance policy in India.
       He requests his brother in India to pay the insurance premium. This will
       amount to payment for the credit of non-resident. This is not permitted.

(iii) Example pertaining to clause (c)­ A foreign tourist comes to India and he
       takes food at a restaurant. He would like to pay US$ 20 in cash to the
       restaurant. The restaurant cannot accept cash as it will be a receipt otherwise
       than through Authorised Person. The restaurant will have to take a money
       changers license to accept foreign currency.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.17  a

(iv) Example pertaining to clause (d)­Transactions covered by this sub-section
       are known as Hawala transactions. An Indian resident gives ` 70,000 in cash
       to an Indian dealer. For this transaction, the brother in Dubai will get US$
       1,000 from a Dubai dealer. The two dealers may settle the transactions later.
       However, transaction is not permitted.

 Holding of foreign exchange [Section 4]

Except as provided in this Act, no person resident in India shall acquire, hold, own,
possess or transfer any foreign exchange, foreign security or any immovable
property situated outside India.

This section prevents Indian residents to acquire, hold, own, possess or transfer any
foreign exchange, foreign security or immovable property abroad. Then through
separate notifications, acquisition of these assets has been permitted subject to
certain conditions and compliance rules.

Example 2: If an Indian resident receives bank balance of US$ 10,000 from his uncle
in London, the Indian resident cannot hold on to the foreign funds. He is supposed
to bring back the funds as provided in section 8.

 Current account transactions [Section 5]

The term `Current Account Transaction' is defined negatively by Section 2(j) of the
Act. It means a transaction other than a capital account transaction and includes
the following types of transactions:

(i) Payments in the course of ordinary course of foreign trade, other services
       such as short-term banking and credit facilities in the ordinary course of
       business etc.

(ii) Payments in the form of interest on loans or income from investments.

(iii) Remittances for living expenses of parents, spouse, or children living abroad

(iv) Expenses in connection with foreign travel, education etc.

Example 3: An Indian resident imports machinery from a vendor in UK for installing in
his factory. As per accounts and income-tax law, machinery is a "capital expenditure".
However, under FEMA, it does not alter (create) an asset in India for the UK vendor. It
does not create any liability to a UK vendor for the Indian importer. Once the payment
is made, the Indian resident or the UK vendor neither owns nor is owed anything in
the other country. Hence it is a Current Account Transaction.
a  3.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Example 4: An Indian resident imports machinery from a vendor in UK for installing
in his factory on a credit period of 3 months. As per accounts and income-tax law,
for the credit period of 3 months, there is a liability of the Indian importer to the
UK vendor. Technically under FEMA also, it is a liability outside India. However,
under definition of Current Account Transaction [Section 2(j)(i)], "short-term
banking and credit facilities in the ordinary course of business" are considered as a
Current Account Transaction. Hence, import of machinery on credit terms is Current
Account Transaction.

Example 5: A Person Resident in India transfers US$ 1,000 to his NRI brother in
New York as "gift". The funds are sent from the PRII's Indian bank account to the
NRI brother's bank account in New York. Under accounts and income-tax law, gift
is a "capital receipt". However, under FEMA, once the gift is accepted by the NRI,
no one owns or owes anything to anyone in India or USA. The transaction is over.
Hence, it is a Current Account Transaction.

If gift is a current account transaction, why is there a restriction under Current
Account regulations? It is because while there is no restriction on Current Account
transactions, some reasonable restrictions can be imposed. Otherwise, people may
transfer funds abroad under the garb of current account transactions.

If however the PRII gives a PROI a gift in India in Indian currency, for the PROI it
will result in funds lying in India (alteration of Indian asset). For PRII, there is no
creation of asset or a liability. As this transaction creates an asset in India for the
PROI, it is a Capital Account transaction.

In a similar manner, if a PROI gives a gift to a PRII by remitting funds in India, there
is no restriction. However, if the PROI gives the funds abroad, the resident cannot
keep it abroad. He has to bring it to India.

Any person may sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an authorised person if
such sale or drawal is a current account transaction.

The Central Government may, in public interest and in consultation with the
Reserve Bank, impose such reasonable restrictions for current account
transactions as prescribed under the FEM (Current Account Transactions)
Rules, 2000.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.19  a

The general rule to be understood is that Current Account transactions are freely
permitted unless specifically prohibited and Capital Account transactions are
prohibited unless specifically or generally permitted.

Section 5 of the Act permits any person to sell or draw Foreign Exchange to or from
an Authorised person to undertake any current account transaction. The Central
Government has the power to impose reasonable restrictions, in consultation with
the RBI and in public interest on current account transactions. The Central
Government has in exercise of this power issued the Foreign Exchange
Management (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000.
Let us now see the various schedules to the Rules that lay down the restrictions:

I. SCHEDULE I

2Transactions for which drawal of foreign exchange is prohibited:

(i) Remittance out of lottery winnings.

(ii) Remittance of income from racing/riding, etc., or any other hobby.

(iii) Remittance for purchase of lottery tickets, banned/prescribed magazines,
       football pools, sweepstakes etc.

(iv) Payment of commission on exports made towards equity investment in Joint
       Ventures/Wholly Owned Subsidiaries abroad of Indian companies.

(v) Remittance of dividend by any company to which the requirement of dividend
       balancing is applicable.

(vi) Payment of commission on exports under Rupee State Credit Route, except
       commission up to 10% of invoice value of exports of tea and tobacco.

(vii) Payment related to "Call Back Services" of telephones.

(viii) Remittance of interest income on funds held in Non-resident Special Rupee
       Scheme a/c.

2Schedule I (Transactions which are prohibited)-Foreign Exchange Management (Current
Account Transactions) Rules, 2000 as amended from time to time.
a    3.20        CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

II. SCHEDULE II

3Transactions, which require prior approval of the Government of India for drawal
of foreign exchange:

     Purpose of Remittance                Ministry/Department of Govt.
                                            of India whose approval is
                                                         required

Cultural Tours                            Ministry of Human Resources
                                          Development (Department of
                                          Education and Culture)

Advertisement in foreign print media for  Ministry of Finance, Department
the purposes other than promotion of      of Economic Affairs
tourism, foreign investments and
international bidding (exceeding US$
10,000) by a State Government and its
Public Sector Undertakings.

Remittance of freight of vessel charted by a Ministry of Surface Transport

PSU                                       (Chartering Wing)

Payment of import through ocean transport Ministry of Surface Transport
by a Govt. Department or a PSU on c.i.f. (Chartering Wing)
basis (i.e., other than f.o.b. and f.a.s. basis)

Multi-modal transport operators making Registration Certificate from the

remittance to their agents abroad         Director General of Shipping

Remittance of hiring charges of Ministry of Information and

transponders by                           Broadcasting

(a) TV Channels                           Ministry of Communication and
(b) Internet service providers            Information Technology.

Remittance of container detention charges Ministry of Surface Transport
exceeding the rate prescribed by Director (Director General of Shipping)
General of Shipping

3Schedule II (Transactions which require prior approval of the Central Government) - Foreign
Exchange Management (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000 as amended from time
to time
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999                          3.21  a

Remittance of prize money/ sponsorship of  Ministry of Human Resource
sports activity abroad by a person other   Development (Department of
than International/ National/State Level   Youth Affairs and Sports)
sports bodies, if the amount involved
exceeds US $ 100,000

Remittance for membership of P & I Club    Ministry of Finance (Insurance
                                           Division)

4Transactions which require RBI's prior approval for drawal of foreign
exchange:

SCHEDULE III
1. Facilities for individuals--Individuals can avail of foreign exchange

       facility for the following purposes within the limit of USD 250,000 only.:
       (i) Private visits to any country (except Nepal and Bhutan)
       (ii) Gift or donation.
       (iii) Going abroad for employment
       (iv) Emigration
       (v) Maintenance of close relatives abroad
       (vi) Travel for business or attending a conference or specialised training or

               for meeting expenses for meeting medical expenses, or check-up
               abroad, or for accompanying as attendant to a patient going abroad for
               medical treatment/ check-up.
       (vii) Expenses in connection with medical treatment abroad
       (viii) Studies abroad
       (ix) Any other current account transaction
       Any additional remittance in excess of the said limit for the said purposes
       shall require prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India.
       However, for the purposes mentioned at item numbers (iv), (vii) and (viii)
       above, the individual may avail of exchange facility for an amount in excess

4 Schedule III- Notification no G.S.R. 426(E) dated 26th May 2015
a  3.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       of the limit prescribed under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme as provided
       in regulation 4 to FEMA Notification 1/2000-RB, dated the 3rd May,
       2000 (here in after referred to as the said Liberalised Remittance Scheme) if
       it is so required by a country of emigration, medical institute offering
       treatment or the university, respectively:

       Further, if an individual remits any amount under the said Liberalised
       Remittance Scheme in a financial year, then the applicable limit for such
       individual would be reduced from USD 250,000 (US Dollars Two Hundred and
       Fifty Thousand Only) by the amount so remitted:

       Further, that for a person who is resident but not permanently resident in
       India and-

       (a) is a citizen of a foreign State other than Pakistan; or

       (b) is a citizen of India, who is on deputation to the office or branch of a
               foreign company or subsidiary or joint venture in India of such foreign
               company,

       may make remittance up to his net salary (after deduction of taxes,
       contribution to provident fund and other deductions).

       Explanation: For the purpose of this item, a person resident in India on
       account of his employment or deputation of a specified duration (irrespective
       of length thereof) or for a specific job or assignments, the duration of which
       does not exceed three years, is a resident but not permanently resident:

       Further, a person other than an individual may also avail of foreign exchange
       facility, mutatis mutandis, within the limit prescribed under the said
       Liberalised Remittance Scheme for the purposes mentioned herein above.

2. Facilities for persons other than individual--The following remittances
       by persons other than individuals shall require prior approval of the
       Reserve Bank of India:

       (i) Donations exceeding one per cent. of their foreign exchange earnings
               during the previous three financial years or USD 5,000,000, whichever is
               less, for-

               a. creation of Chairs in reputed educational institutes,
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.23  a

               b. contribution to funds (not being an investment fund) promoted
                       by educational institutes; and

               c. contribution to a technical institution or body or association in
                       the field of activity of the donor Company.

       (ii) Commission, per transaction, to agents abroad for sale of residential
               flats or commercial plots in India exceeding USD 25,000 or five percent
               of the inward remittance whichever is more.

       (iii) Remittances exceeding USD 10,000,000 per project for any consultancy
               services in respect of infrastructure projects and USD 1,000,000 per
               project, for other consultancy services procured from outside India.

               Explanation--For the purposes of this sub-paragraph, the expression
               "infrastructure' shall mean as defined in explanation to para 1(iv)(A)(a)
               of Schedule I of FEMA Notification 3/2000-RB, dated the May 3, 2000.

       (iv) Remittances exceeding five per cent of investment brought into India
               or USD 100,000 whichever is higher, by an entity in India by way of
               reimbursement of pre-incorporation expenses.

3. Procedure--The procedure for drawal or remittance of any foreign exchange
       under this schedule shall be the same as applicable for remitting any amount
       under the said Liberalised Remittance Scheme.

       If the transaction is not listed in any of the above three schedules, it can
       be freely undertaken.

       Exemption for remittance from RFC Account ­ No approval is required
       where any remittance has to be made for the transactions listed in Schedule
       II and Schedule III above from an Resident Foreign Currency (RFC) account.

       Exemption for remittance from EEFC Account ­ If any remittance has to be
       made for the transactions listed in Schedule II and Schedule III above from
       Exchange Earners' Foreign Currency (EEFC) account, then also no approval is
       required. However, if payment has to be made for the following transactions,
       approval is required even if payment is from EEFC account:

       · Remittance for membership of P & I Club.

       · Commission, per transaction, to agents abroad for sale of residential
               flats or commercial plots in India exceeding USD 25,000 or five per cent
a  3.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               of the inward remittance whichever is more. Remittances exceeding five
               per cent of investment brought into India or USD 100,000 whichever is
               higher, by an entity in India by way of reimbursement of pre-
               incorporation expenses.

       Exemption for payment by International Credit Card while on a visit
       abroad ­ If a person is on a visit abroad, he can incur expenditure stated in
       Schedule III if he incurs it through International credit card.

Note: Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS): Under the Liberalised Remittance
Scheme (LRS), all resident individuals, including minors, are allowed to freely remit
up to USD 250,000 per financial year (April ­ March) for any permissible current or
capital account transaction or a combination of both. This is inclusive of foreign
exchange facility for the purposes mentioned in Para 1 of Schedule III of Foreign
Exchange Management (CAT) Amendment Rules 2015, dated May 26, 2015.

In case of remitter being a minor, the LRS declaration form must be
countersigned by the minor's natural guardian. The Scheme is not available to
corporates, partnership firms, HUF, Trusts etc.

Consolidation of remittance of family members - Remittances under the
Scheme can be consolidated in respect of family members subject to individual
family members complying with its terms and conditions.

Exception: Clubbing is not permitted by other family members for capital
account transactions such as opening a bank account/investment/purchase of
property, if they are not the co-owners/co-partners of the overseas bank
account/investment/property.

 Capital account transactions [Section 6]

The definitions of "Capital Account Transactions" and its opposite "current account
transactions are contained in clauses (e) and (j) of Section 2. The regulations under
FEMA apply to a transaction based on whether the transaction is "Capital Account
Transaction" or a "Current Account Transaction". These transactions broadly outline
the basics and whole approach of the Act. Basically these two transactions have to
be understood as being similar to the concepts of items relating to the profit and
loss account or revenue items (with respect to current account transactions) and of
Balance Sheet or capital items (with respect to capital account transactions).
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.25  a

Capital Account Transactions means "A transaction which alters the assets or
liabilities including contingent liabilities outside India of persons resident in India
or assets or liabilities in India of persons resident outside India would be a capital
account transaction."

Capital Accounts Transaction in India can be carried out only to the extent
permitted because Indian Rupee is not yet fully convertible. Capital and current
account transactions are intended to be mutually exclusive. A transaction which
alters the asset or liabilities in India of non-residents falls under the category
of capital account. However, as far as residents are concerned transactions which
alter the contingent liabilities outside India are also capital account
transactions. The Reserve Bank of India may by regulations place restrictions on
various specified capital account transactions. In simple terms, cross border
transactions pertaining to investments, loans, immovable property, transfer of
assets are Capital Account Transactions.

(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), any person may sell or draw
       foreign exchange to or from an authorised person for a capital account
       transaction.

(2) Reserve Bank had the power to specify the Capital Account transactions
       which are permitted and the relevant limits, terms and conditions. By
       Finance Act 2015, powers for regulation of Capital Account Transactions for
       Non-debt instruments were transferred to Central Government. RBI
       continued to have powers to regulate debt instruments. The amendments
a  3.26  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       have however been made effective from 15th October 2019. Now the
       regulations are as under:

       The Reserve Bank may, in consultation with the Central Government, specify:

       (a) any class or classes of capital account transactions,5involving debt
               instruments, which are permissible;

       (b) the limit up to which foreign exchange shall be admissible for such
               transactions;

       (c) any conditions which may be placed on such transactions;

       Provided that the Reserve Bank or the Central Government shall not impose
       any restrictions on the drawal of foreign exchange for payment due on
       account of amortisation of loans or for depreciation of direct investments in
       the ordinary course of business.

       RBI has issued notification for Debt instruments specifying the terms and
       conditions. These regulations for foreign investment in debt instruments. For
       investment by Indian residents outside India, RBI continues to have power to
       regulate the transactions for equity and debt.

(2A) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank,
       prescribe-- (a) any class or classes of capital account transactions, not
       involving debt instruments, which are permissible; (b) the limit up to which
       foreign exchange shall be admissible for such transactions; and (c) any
       conditions which may be placed on such transactions.

       Central Government has issued notification for Non-debt instruments
       specifying the terms and conditions. RBI has issued notification for mode of
       payment and reporting of Non-debt instruments.

(3) Before 15th October 2019, Section 6(3) specified a list of capital account
       transactions which could be regulated by RBI [apart from the general powers
       which it had under Section 6(2)]. This list has now been deleted from
       15th October 2019.

5 Amended w.e.f. 15-10-2019
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.27  a

(4) A person resident in India may hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign
       currency, foreign security or any immovable property situated outside India
       if such currency, security or property was acquired, held or owned by such
       person when he was resident outside India or inherited from a person
       who was resident outside India.

       The RBI vide A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 90 dated 9thJanuary, 2014 has issued
       a clarification on section 6(4) of the Act. This circular clarifies that section 6(4)
       of the Act covers the following transactions:

       (i) Foreign currency accounts opened and maintained by such a person
               when he was resident outside India;

       (ii) Income earned through employment or business or vocation outside
               India taken up or commenced which such person was resident outside
               India, or from investments made while such person was resident outside
               India, or from gift or inheritance received while such a person was
               resident outside India;

       (iii) Foreign exchange including any income arising therefrom, and
               conversion or replacement or accrual to the same, held outside India by
               a person resident in India acquired by way of inheritance from a person
               resident outside India.

       (iv) A person resident in India may freely utilize all their eligible assets
               abroad as well as income on such assets or sale proceeds thereof
               received after their return to India for making any payments or to make
               any fresh investments abroad without approval of Reserve Bank,
               provided the cost of such investments and/or any subsequent payments
               received therefor are met exclusively out of funds forming part of
               eligible assets held by them and the transactions is not in contravention
               to extant FEMA provisions.

(5) A person resident outside India may hold, own, transfer or invest in
       Indian currency, security or any immovable property situated in India if such
       currency, security or property was acquired, held or owned by a such person
       when he was resident in India or inherited from a person who was
       resident in India.
a  3.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section, the Reserve Bank may, by
       regulation, prohibit, restrict, or regulate establishment in India of a branch,
       office or other place of business by a person resident outside India, for
       carrying on any activity relating to such branch, office or other place of
       business.

          Capital Account Transactions [Sec. 6(4) & 6(5)]

                   PRII                     PROI
         As per Section 6(4)       As per Section 6(5)

         MAY                       MAY

         HOLD, OWN, TRANSFER   HOLD, OWN, TRANSFER
         OR INVEST IN FOREIGN   OR INVEST IN INDIAN
                                CURRENCY, SECURITY
           CURRENCY, FOREIGH     OR ANY IMMOVABLE
             SECURITY OR ANY   PROPERTY SITUATED IN

         IMMOVABLE PROPERTY                INDIA
            SITUATED OUTSIDE
                     INDIA                   IF

                       IF

              THE SAME WAS          THE SAME WAS
           ACQUIRED, HELD OR     ACQUIRED, HELD OR

             OWNED BY SUCH         OWNED BY SUCH
         PERSON WHEN HE WAS    PERSON WHEN HE WAS

           PROI OR INHERITED      PRII OR INHERITED
                FROM A PROI            FROM A PRII

(7) For the purposes of this section, the term "debt instruments" shall mean, such
       instruments as may be determined by the Central Government in consultation
       with the Reserve Bank.

A capital account transaction as stated earlier is a transaction, which alters the
assets or liabilities, including contingent liabilities, outside India of persons resident
in India or assets or liabilities in India of persons resident outside India would be a
capital account transaction. The section gives a liberty by providing that any person
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999             3.29  a

may sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an authorised person for capital
account transactions. However, the liberty to do so is subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2) and (2A), which states that the Reserve Bank and the Central
Government may specify class or classes of capital account transactions, which are
permissible limit upto, which the foreign exchange shall be admissible for such
transactions and the conditions which may be placed on such transactions.

Capital account transaction is basically split into the following categories under
Foreign Exchange Management (Permissible capital account transactions)
Regulations, 20006 -:

(I) transaction, which are permissible in respect of persons resident in India and
       outside India.

(II) transaction on which restrictions cannot be imposed; and

(III) transactions, which are prohibited.

I. Permissible Transactions

Under sub-section (2) of Section 6, the RBI has issued the Foreign Exchange
Management (Permissible Capital Account Transactions) Regulations, 2000. The
Regulations specify the list of transaction, which are permissible in respect of
persons resident in India in Schedule-I and the classes of capital account
transactions of persons resident outside India in Schedule-II.

Further, subject to the provisions of the Act or the rules or regulations or direction
or orders made or issued thereunder, any person may sell or draw foreign exchange
to or from an authorised person for a capital account transaction specified in the
Schedules; provided that the transaction is within the limit, if any, specified in the
regulations relevant to the transaction.

SCHEDULE I

The list of permissible classes of transactions made by persons resident in India
is:

(a) Investment by a person resident in India in foreign securities.

6Notification No. FEMA 1 /2000-RB dated 3rd May 2000
a  3.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(b) Foreign currency loans raised in India and abroad by a person resident in
       India.

(c) Transfer of immovable property outside India by a person resident in India.

(d) Guarantees issued by a person resident in India in favour of a person resident
       outside India.

(e) Export, import and holding of currency/currency notes.

(f) Loans and overdrafts (borrowings) by a person resident in India from a person
       resident outside India.

(g) Maintenance of foreign currency accounts in India and outside India by a
       person resident in India.

(h) Taking out of insurance policy by a person resident in India from an insurance
       company outside India.

(i) Loans and overdrafts by a person resident in India to a person resident
       outside India.

(j) Remittance outside India of capital assets of a person resident in India.

(k) Undertake derivative contracts
SCHEDULE II

The list of permissible classes of transactions made by persons resident outside
India is:

(a) Investment in India by a person resident outside India, that is to say,

       (i) issue of security by a body corporate or an entity in India and
               investment therein by a person resident outside India; and

       (ii) investment by way of contribution by a person resident outside India to
               the capital of a firm or a proprietorship concern or an association of a
               person in India.

(b) Acquisition and transfer of immovable property in India by a person resident
       outside India.

(c) Guarantee by a person resident outside India in favour of, or on behalf of, a
       person resident in India.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.31  a

(d) Import and export of currency/currency notes into/from India by a person
       resident outside India.

(e) Deposits between a person resident in India and a person resident outside
       India.

(f) Foreign currency accounts in India of a person resident outside India.
(g) Remittance outside India of capital assets in India of a person resident outside

       India.
(h) Undertake derivative contracts

Transactions with no restriction

They are:
(1) For amortisation of loan and
(2) For depreciation of direct investments in ordinary course of business.

Also, restrictions cannot be imposed when drawal is of the purpose of repayments
of loan installments.

Prohibited Transactions

On certain transactions, the Reserve Bank of India imposes prohibition.
(a) no person shall undertake or sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an

       authorised person for any capital account transaction,

       provided that-
       (i) subject to the provisions of the Act or the rules or regulations or

               directions or orders made or issued thereunder, a resident individual
               may, draw from an authorized person foreign exchange not
               exceeding USD 250,000 per financial year or such amount as
               decided by Reserve Bank from time to time for a capital account
               transaction specified in Schedule I.
               Explanation: Drawal of foreign exchange as per item number 1 of
               Schedule III to Foreign Exchange Management (Current Account
               Transactions) Rules, 2000 dated 3rd May 2000 as amended from time
               to time, shall be subsumed within the limit under proviso (a) above.
a  3.32  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ii) Where the drawal of foreign exchange by a resident individual for any
               capital account transaction specified in Schedule I exceeds USD
               250,000 per financial year, or as decided by Reserve Bank from time
               to time as the case may be, the limit specified in the regulations relevant
               to the transaction shall apply with respect to such drawal.

       Provided further that no part of the foreign exchange of USD 250,000, drawn
       under proviso (a) shall be used for remittance directly or indirectly to
       countries notified as non-co-operative countries and territories by Financial
       Action Task Force (FATF) from time to time and communicated by the Reserve
       Bank of India to all concerned.

(b) The person resident outside India is prohibited from making investments
       in India in any form, in any company, or partnership firm or proprietary
       concern or any entity whether incorporated or not which is engaged or
       proposes to engage:

       (i) In the business of chit fund; Registrar of Chits or an officer authorised
               by the state government in this behalf, may, in consultation with the
               State Government concerned, permit any chit fund to accept
               subscription from Non-resident Indians. Non- resident Indians shall be
               eligible to subscribe, through banking channel and on non- repatriation
               basis, to such chit funds, without limit subject to the conditions
               stipulated by the Reserve Bank of India from time to time

       (ii) As Nidhi company;

       (iii) In agricultural or plantation activities;

       (iv) In real estate business, or construction of farm houses or

               Explanation: In "real estate business" the term shall not include
               development of townships, construction of residential/commercial
               premises, roads or bridges and Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)
               registered and regulated under the SEBI (REITs) Regulations 2014.; or

       (v) In trading in Transferable Development Rights (TDRs).

       'Transferable Development Rights' means certificates issued in respect of
       category of land acquired for public purpose either by Central or State
       Government in consideration of surrender of land by the owner without
       monetary compensation, which are transferable in part or whole;
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.33  a

(c) No person resident in India shall undertake any capital account transaction
       which is not permissible in terms of Order S.O. 1549(E) dated April 21, 2017,
       as amended from time to time, of the Government of India, Ministry of
       External Affairs, with any person who is, a citizen of or a resident of
       Democratic People's Republic of Korea, or an entity incorporated or
       otherwise, in Democratic People's Republic of Korea, until further orders,
       unless there is specific approval from the Central Government to carry on any
       transaction.

(d) The existing investment transactions, with any person who is, a citizen of
       or resident of Democratic People's Republic of Korea, or an entity
       incorporated or otherwise in Democratic People's Republic of Korea, or any
       existing representative office or other assets possessed in Democratic
       People's Republic of Korea, by a person resident in India, which is not
       permissible in terms of Order S.O. 1549(E) dated April 21, 2017, as amended
       from time to time, of the Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs
       shall be closed/ liquidated/disposed/settled within a period of 180 days
       from the date of issue of this Notification, unless there is specific approval
       from the Central Government to continue beyond that period."

Thus, a capital account transaction is permitted only if it is specifically permitted
under the regulations. If the transaction is not stated as generally permitted, a prior
specific approval is required.

SUMMARY

 FEMA makes provisions in respect of dealings in foreign exchange.

 FEMA regulates transactions between residents and non-residents.

 Broadly, all current account transactions are free. However, Central
       Government can impose reasonable instructions by issuing rules.

 Capital account transactions are regulated by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and
       Central Government.

 FEMA envisages that RBI will have a controlling role in management of
       foreign exchange.
a  3.34  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQ Based Questions

1. In September, 2021, Mr. Purshottam Saha visited Atlanta as well as Athens and
       thereafter, London and Berlin on a month-long business trip, for which he
       withdrew foreign exchange to the extent of US$ 50,000 from his banker State
       Bank of India, New Delhi branch. In December, 2021 he further, withdrew US$
       50,000 from SBI and remitted the same to his son Raviyansh Saha who was
       studying in Toronto, Canada. In the first week of January, 2022, he sent his
       ailing mother Mrs. Savita Saha for a specialised treatment along with his wife
       Mrs. Rashmi Saha to Seattle where his younger brother Pranav Saha, holder of
       Green Card, is residing. For the purpose of his mother's treatment and to help
       Pranav Saha to meet increased expenses, he requested his banker SBI to remit
       US$ 75,000 to Pranav Saha's account maintained with Citibank, Seattle. In
       February, 2022, Mr. Purshottam Saha's daughter Devanshi Saha got engaged
       and she opted for a `destination marriage' to be held in August, 2022 in Zurich,
       Switzerland. While on a trip to Dubai in the last week of March, 2022, he again
       withdrew US$ 35,000 to be used by him and Devanshi Saha for meeting various
       trip expenses including shopping in Dubai. Later, the event manager gave an
       estimate of US$ 2,50,000 for the wedding of Devanshi Saha at Zurich,
       Switzerland. Which option do you think is the correct one in the light of
       applicable provisions of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 including
       obtaining of prior approval, if any, from Reserve Bank of India since Mr.
       Purshottam Saha withdrew foreign exchange on various occasions from his
       banker State Bank of India.

       (a) In respect of withdrawal of foreign exchange on various occasions from
               his banker State Bank of India and remitting the same outside India
               during the financial year 2021-22, Mr. Purshottam Saha is not required
               to obtain any prior approval.

       (b) In respect of withdrawal of US$ 35,000 in the last week of March, 2022,
               for a trip to Dubai, Mr. Purshottam Saha must have obtained prior
               approval of Reserve Bank of India since the maximum amount of foreign
               exchange that can be withdrawn in a financial year is US$ 1,75,000.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.35  a

       (c) After withdrawing US$ 1,00,000, Mr. Purshottam Saha must have
               obtained prior approval of Reserve Bank of India for the remaining
               remittances made during the financial year 2021-22, otherwise SBI would
               not have permitted further withdrawals.

       (d) After withdrawing US$ 50,000, Mr. Purshottam Saha must have obtained
               prior approval of Reserve Bank of India for the remaining remittances
               made during the financial year 2021-22, otherwise SBI would not have
               permitted further withdrawals.

2. M/s. Kedhar Sports Academy, a private coaching club, provides coaching for
       cricket, football and other similar sports. It coaches sports aspirants pan India.
       It also conducts various sports events and campaigns, across the country. In
       2022, to mark the 25th year of its operation, a cricket tournament (akin to the
       format of T-20) is being organized by M/s. Kedhar Sports Academy in
       Lancashire, England, in the first half of April. The prize money for the `winning
       team' is fixed at USD 40,000 whereas in case of `runner-up', it is pegged at USD
       11,000. You are required to choose the correct option from the four given below
       which signifies the steps to be taken by M/s. Kedhar Sports Academy for
       remittance of the prize money of USD 51,000 (i.e. USD 40,000+USD 11,000) to
       England keeping in view the relevant provisions of Foreign Exchange
       Management Act, 1999:

       (a) For remittance of the prize money of USD 51,000, M/s Kedhar Sports
               Academy is required to obtain prior permission from the Ministry of Human
               Resource Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports).

       (b) For remittance of the prize money of USD 51,000, M/s Kedhar Sports
               Academy is required to obtain prior permission from the Reserve Bank of
               India.

       (c) For remittance of the prize money of USD 51,000, M/s Kedhar Sports
               Academy is not required to obtain any prior permission from any
               authority, whatsoever, and it can proceed to make the remittance.

       (d) For remittance of the prize money of USD 51,000, M/s Kedhar Sports
               Academy is required to obtain prior permission from the Ministry of
               Finance (Department of Economic Affairs).
a  3.36  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

3. Akash Ceramics Limited, an Indian company, holds a commercial plot in Chennai
       which it intends to sell. M/s. Super Seller, a real estate broker with its Head Office
       in the USA, has been appointed by Akash Ceramics Limited to find some suitable
       buyers for the said commercial plot in Chennai which is situated at a prime
       location. M/s. Super Seller identifies Glory Estate Inc., based out of USA, as the
       potential buyer. It is to be noted that Glory Estate Inc. is controlled from India
       and hence, is a `Person Resident in India' under the applicable provisions of
       Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999. A deal is finalised and Glory Estate
       Inc. agrees to purchase the commercial plot for USD 600,000 (assuming 1 USD
       = ` 70). According to the agreement, Akash Ceramics Limited is required to pay
       commission @ 7% of the sale proceeds to M/s. Super Seller for arranging the sale
       of commercial plot to Glory Estate Inc. and commission is to remitted in USD to
       the Head Office of M/s. Super Seller located in USA. Considering the relevant
       provisions of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, which statement out of
       the four given below is correct (ignoring TDS implications arising under the
       Income-tax Act, 1961):

       (a) There is no requirement of obtaining prior permission of Reserve Bank of
               India (RBI) for remittance of commission upto USD 25,000 by Akash
               Ceramics Limited to M/s. Super Seller but for the balance commission of
               USD 17,000, prior permission of RBI is required to be obtained.

       (b) There is no requirement of obtaining prior permission of Reserve Bank of
               India (RBI) for remittance of commission upto USD 30,000 by Akash
               Ceramics Limited to M/s. Super Seller but for the balance commission of
               USD 12,000, prior permission of RBI is required to be obtained.

       (c) There is no requirement of obtaining prior permission of Reserve Bank of
               India (RBI) for remittance of entire commission of USD 42,000 by Akash
               Ceramics Limited to M/s. Super Seller.

       (d) It is mandatory to obtain prior permission of Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
               for remittance of entire commission of USD 42,000 by Akash Ceramics
               Limited to M/s. Super Seller.

4. Mohita Periodicals and Mags Publications Limited, having registered office in
       Chennai, has obtained consultancy services from an entity based in France for
       setting up a software programme to strengthen various aspects relating to
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.37  a

       publications. The consideration for such consultancy services is required to be
       paid in foreign currency. The compliance officer of Mohita Periodicals and Mags
       Publications Limited, Mrs. Ritika requires your advice regarding the foreign
       exchange that can be remitted for the purpose of obtaining consultancy services
       from abroad without prior approval of Reserve Bank of India. Out of the
       following four options, choose the one which correctly portrays the amount of
       foreign exchange remittable for the given purpose after considering the
       provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and regulations
       made thereunder:

       (a) Permissible amount of foreign exchange that can be remitted by Mohita
               Periodicals and Mags Publications Limited for obtaining consultancy
               services from an entity based in France without prior approval of RBI is
               US$ 50,000,000.

       (b) Permissible amount of foreign exchange that can be remitted by Mohita
               Periodicals and Mags Publications Limited for obtaining consultancy
               services from an entity based in France without prior approval of RBI is
               US$ 10,000,000.

       (c) Permissible amount of foreign exchange that can be remitted by Mohita
               Periodicals and Mags Publications Limited for obtaining consultancy
               services from an entity based in France without prior approval of RBI is
               US$ 5,000,000.

       (d) Permissible amount of foreign exchange that can be remitted by Mohita
               Periodicals and Mags Publications Limited for obtaining consultancy
               services from an entity based in France without prior approval of RBI is
               US$ 1,000,000.

5. After five years of stay in USA, Mr. Umesh came to India at his paternal place
       in New Delhi on October 25, 2021, for the purpose of conducting business with
       his two younger brothers Rajesh and Somesh and contributed a sum of
       ` 10,00,000 as his capital. Simultaneously, Mr. Umesh also started a proprietary
       business of selling artistic brass ware, jewellery, etc. procured directly from the
       manufacturers based at Moradabad. Within a period of two months after his
       arrival from USA, Mr. Umesh established a branch of his proprietary business
       at Minnesota, USA. You are required choose the appropriate option with respect
       to residential status of Mr. Umesh and his branch for the financial year 2022-
a  3.38  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

   23 after considering the applicable provisions of the Foreign Exchange
   Management Act, 1999:

   (a) For the financial year 2022-23, Mr. Umesh and his branch established at
          Minnesota, USA, are both persons resident outside India.

   (b) For the financial year 2022-23, Mr. Umesh is a resident in India but his
          branch established at Minnesota, USA, is a person resident outside India.

   (c) For the financial year 2022-23, Mr. Umesh and his branch established at
          Minnesota, USA, are both persons resident in India.

   (d) For the financial year 2022-23, Mr. Umesh is a person resident outside India
          but his branch established at Minnesota, USA, is a person resident in India.

Descriptive Questions

1. `Printex Computer' is a Singapore based company having several business units
       all over the world. It has a unit for manufacturing computer printers with its
       Headquarters in Pune. It has a Branch in Dubai which is controlled by the
       Headquarters in Pune. What would be the residential status under the FEMA,
       1999 of printer units in Pune and that of Dubai branch?

2. Mr. Sane, an Indian National desires to obtain Foreign Exchange for the
       following purposes:

       (i) Remittance of US Dollar 50,000 out of winnings on a lottery ticket.

       (ii) US Dollar 100,000 for sending a cultural troupe on a tour of U.S.A.

       Advise him whether he can get Foreign Exchange and if so, under what
       conditions?

3. State which kind of approval is required for the following transactions under
       the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999:

       (i) X, a Film Star, wants to perform along with associates in New York on the
               occasion of Diwali for Indians residing at New York. Foreign Exchange
               drawal to the extent of US dollars 20,000 is required for this purpose.

       (ii) R wants to get his heart surgery done at United Kingdom. Up to what
               limit Foreign Exchange can be drawn by him and what are the approvals
               required?
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.39  a

4. Referring to the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999,
       state the kind of approval required for the following transactions:

       (i) M requires U.S. $ 5,000 for remittance towards hiring charges of
               transponders.

       (ii) P requires U.S. $ 2,000 for payment related to call back services of
               telephones.

5. Suresh resided in India during the Financial Year 2020-2021. He left India on
       15th July 2021 for Switzerland for pursuing higher studies in Biotechnology for
       2 years. What would be his residential status under the Foreign Exchange
       Management Act, 1999 during the Financial Years 2021-2022 and 2022-2023?

       Mr. Suresh requires every year USD 25,000 towards tuition fees and USD 30,000
       for incidental and stay expenses for studying abroad. Is it possible for Mr.
       Suresh to get the required Foreign Exchange and, if so, under what conditions?

6. (i) Mr. P has won a big lottery and wants to remit US Dollar 20,000 out of
               his winnings to his son who is in USA. Advise whether such remittance is
               possible under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.

       (ii) Mr. Z is unwell and would like to have a kidney transplant done in USA.
               He would like to know the formalities required and the amount that can
               be drawn as foreign exchange for the medical treatment abroad.

7. Mr. Rohan, an Indian Resident individual desires to obtain Foreign Exchange
       for the following purposes:

       (A) US$ 120,000 for studies abroad on the basis of estimates given by the
               foreign university.

       (B) Gift Remittance amounting US$ 10,000.

       Advise him whether he can get Foreign Exchange and if so, under what
       condition(s)?
a  3.40  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

ANSWERS

Answers to MCQ based Questions

1. (a)   In respect of withdrawal of foreign exchange on various occasions
         from his banker State Bank of India and remitting the same outside
         India during the financial year 2021-22, Mr. Purshottam Saha is not
         required to obtain any prior approval.

2. (c)   For remittance of the prize money of USD 51,000, M/s Kedhar Sports
         Academy is not required to obtain any prior permission from any
         authority, whatsoever, and it can proceed to make the remittance.

3. (d) It is mandatory to obtain prior permission of Reserve Bank of India
              (RBI) for remittance of entire commission of USD 42,000 by Akash
              Ceramics Limited to M/s. Super Seller.

4. (d) Permissible amount of foreign exchange that can be remitted by
              Mohita Periodicals and Mags Publications Limited for obtaining
              consultancy services from an entity based in France without prior
              approval of RBI is US$ 1,000,000.

5. (c) For the financial year 2022-23, Mr. Umesh and his branch established
              at Minnesota, USA, are both persons resident in India.

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. Printex Computer being a Singapore based company would be person
       resident outside India [(Section 2(w)]. Section 2 (u) defines `person' under
       clause (viii) thereof, as person would include any agency, office or branch
       owned or controlled by such person. The term such person appears to refer
       to a person who is included in clause (i) to (vi). Accordingly, Printex unit in
       Pune, being a branch of a company would be a `person'.

       Section 2(v) defines a person resident in India. Under clause (iii) thereof
       person resident in India would include an office, branch or agency in India
       owned or controlled by a person resident outside India. Printex unit in Pune
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.41  a

       is owned or controlled by a person resident outside India, and hence it, would
       be a `person resident in India.'

       However, Dubai Branch though not owned is controlled by the Printer unit in
       Pune which is a person resident in India. Hence, the Dubai Branch is a person
       resident in India.

2. Under provisions of section 5 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
       certain Rules have been made for drawal of Foreign Exchange for Current
       Account transactions. As per these Rules, Foreign Exchange for some of the
       Current Account transactions is prohibited. As regards some other Current
       Account transactions, Foreign Exchange can be drawn with prior permission
       of the Central Government while in case of some Current Account
       transactions, prior permission of Reserve Bank of India is required.

       (i) In respect of item No.(i), i.e., remittance out of lottery winnings, such
               remittance is prohibited and the same is included in First Schedule to the
               Foreign Exchange Management (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000.
               Hence, Mr. Sane cannot withdraw Foreign Exchange for this purpose.

       (ii) Foreign Exchange for meeting expenses of cultural tour can be
               withdrawn by any person after obtaining permission from Government
               of India, Ministry of Human Resources Development, (Department of
               Education and Culture) as prescribed in Second Schedule to the Foreign
               Exchange Management (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000.
               Hence, in respect of item (ii), Mr. Sane can withdraw the Foreign
               Exchange after obtaining such permission.

       In all the cases, where remittance of Foreign Exchange is allowed, either by
       general or specific permission, the remitter has to obtain the Foreign
       Exchange from an Authorised Person as defined in Section 2(c).

3. Approval to the following transactions under FEMA, 1999:

       (i) Foreign Exchange drawals for cultural tours require prior
               permission/approval of the Ministry of Human Resources Development
               (Department of Education and Culture) irrespective of the amount of
               foreign exchange required. Therefore, in the given case X, the Film Star
               is required to seek permission of the said Ministry of the Government
               of India.
a  3.42  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ii) Individuals can avail of foreign exchange facility within the limit of USD
               2,50,000 only. Any additional remittance in excess of the said limit for
               the expenses requires an approval from RBI. However, in connection
               with medical treatment abroad, no approval of the Reserve Bank of
               India is required. Therefore, R can draw foreign exchange up to amount
               estimated by a medical institute offering treatment.

4. Under section 5 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, and Rules
       relating thereto, some current account transactions require prior approval of
       the Central Government, some others require the prior approval of the
       Reserve Bank of India, some are freely permitted transactions and some
       others are prohibited transactions. Accordingly,

       (i) It is a current account transaction, where M is required to take approval
               of the Central Government for drawal of foreign exchange for
               remittance of hire charges of transponders.

       (ii) Withdrawal of foreign exchange for payment related to call back
               services of telephone is a prohibited transaction. Hence, Mr. P cannot
               obtain US $ 2,000 for the said purpose.

5. Residential Status: According to section 2(v) of the Foreign Exchange
       Management Act, 1999, `Person resident in India' means a person residing in
       India for more than 182 days during the course of preceding financial year
       [Section 2(v)(i)]. However, it does not include a person who has gone out of
       India or who stays outside India for employment outside India or for any other
       purpose in such circumstances as would indicate his intention to stay outside
       India for an uncertain period.

       Generally, a student goes out of India for a certain period. In this case, Mr.
       Suresh who resided in India during the financial year 2020-2021 left on
       15.7.2021 for Switzerland for pursuing higher studies in Biotechnology for 2
       years, he will be resident as he has gone to stay outside India for a `certain
       period'. RBI has however clarified in its AP circular no. 45 dated 8th December
       2003, that students will be considered as non-residents. This is because
       usually students start working there to take care of their stay and cost of
       studies.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  3.43  a

       Mr. Suresh will be treated as person resident in India for Financial Year 2021-
       2022 till 16th July 2021 and from 17th July 2021, he will be considered as
       person resident outside India.

       However, during the Financial Year 2022-2023, Mr. Suresh will be considered
       as person resident outside India as he left India on 15th July 2021.

       Foreign Exchange for studies abroad: According to Para I of Schedule III to
       Foreign Exchange Management (Current Account Transactions), Amendment
       Rule, 2015 dated 26th May, 2015, individuals can avail of foreign exchange
       facility for the studies abroad within the limit of USD 2,50,000 only. Any
       additional remittance in excess of the said limit shall require prior approval
       of the RBI. Further proviso to Para I of Schedule III states that individual may
       be allowed remittances (without seeking prior approval of the RBI) exceeding
       USD 2,50,000 based on the estimate received from the institution abroad. In
       this case the foreign exchange required is only USD 55,000 per academic year
       and hence approval of RBI is not required.

6. Remittance of Foreign Exchange (Section 5 of the Foreign Exchange
       Management Act, 1999): According to section 5 of the FEMA, 1999, any
       person may sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an authorized person if
       such a sale or drawal is a current account transaction. Provided that Central
       Government may, in public interest and in consultation with the reserve bank,
       impose such reasonable restrictions for current account transactions as may
       be prescribed.

       As per the rules, drawal of foreign exchange for current account transactions
       are categorized under three headings-

       1. Transactions for which drawal of foreign exchange is prohibited,

       2. Transactions which need prior approval of appropriate government of
               India for drawal of foreign exchange, and

       3. Transactions which require RBI's prior approval for drawl of foreign
               exchange.

               (i) Mr. P wanted to remit US Dollar 20,000 out of his lottery winnings
                       to his son residing in USA. Such remittance is prohibited and the
                       same is included in the Foreign Exchange Management (Current
                       Account Transactions) Rules, 2000.
a  3.44  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

                       Hence Mr. P cannot withdraw foreign exchange for this purpose.

               (ii) "Remittance of foreign exchange for medical treatment abroad"
                       requires prior permission or approval of RBI where the individual
                       requires withdrawal of foreign exchange exceeding USD 250,000.
                       The Schedule also prescribes that for the purpose of expenses in
                       connection with medical treatment, the individual may avail of
                       exchange facility for an amount in excess of the limit prescribed
                       under the Liberalized Remittance Scheme, if so required by a
                       medical institute offering treatment.

       Therefore, Mr. Z can draw foreign exchange up to the USD 250,000 and no
       prior permission/ approval of RBI will be required. For amount exceeding the
       above limit, authorised dealers may release foreign exchange based on the
       estimate from the doctor in India or hospital or doctor abroad.

7. (A) Remittance of Foreign Exchange for studies abroad: Foreign
               exchange may be released for studies abroad up to a limit of US $
               250,000 for the studies abroad without any permission from the RBI.
               Above this limit, RBI's prior approval is required. Further proviso to Para
               I of Schedule III states that individual may be allowed remittances
               exceeding USD 250,000 based on the estimate received from the
               institution abroad. In this case since US $ 120,000 is the drawal of
               foreign exchange, so permission of the RBI is not required.

       (B) Gift remittance exceeding US $ 10,000: Under the provisions of
               section 5 of FEMA 1999, certain Rules have been made for drawal of
               foreign exchange for current account transactions. Gift remittance is a
               current account transaction. Gift remittance exceeding US $ 250,000
               can be made after obtaining prior approval of the RBI. In the present
               case, since the amount to be gifted by an individual, Mr. Rohan is USD
               10,000, there is no need for any permission from the RBI.
CASE SCENARIOS

Case Scenario 1

Golden Limited is a listed company which is incorporated in 2013 having its
registered office at Delhi and corporate office in Noida. It is registered with an
authorised share capital of ` 20 crore divided into 2 crore equity shares of
` 10/- each. The paid-up share capital of the company is ` 10 crore divided into 1
crore equity shares of ` 10/- each. The company is in construction activities like
construction of buildings, roads, etc.
On 8th January, 2023, the company incorporated a wholly owned subsidiary, D
Limited which is involved in supplying of construction materials like steel, iron,
cement, bricks, etc. D Limited elects to choose to prepare its first financial
statements for the period from 8th January, 2023 to 31st March, 2023.
On 2nd January, 2023, Golden Limited incorporated a new wholly owned subsidiary,
E Limited for providing project management consultancy service to its customers
or to parent company. On 5th January, 2023, Golden Limited through its subsidiary,
E Limited acquired 100% partnership interest in XYZ & Co., partnership firm. E
Limited elects to choose to prepare its first financial statements for the period from
2nd January, 2023 to 31st March, 2024 and conducted its Annual General Meeting
on 16th August, 2024.
On 1st July, 2023, the subsidiary company, D Limited incorporated a new wholly
owned subsidiary, F Limited.

Golden Limited prepared its standalone financial statements for the year 2022-23
and presented before the Board of Directors of the company on
25th August, 2023 for their approval and the same were adopted by the
shareholders in the Annual General Meeting held on 2nd September, 2023.
CS.2  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Golden Limited prepared its standalone and consolidated financial statements for
the year 2023-24 and presented before the Board of Directors of the company on
20th August, 2024 for their approval and the same were adopted by the
shareholders in the Annual General Meeting held on 26th September, 2024.

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct answer (one out of
four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -

1. What is the last date for conducting AGM for E Limited?

       (a) 30th September, 2023

       (b) 31st December, 2023

       (c) 30th September, 2024

       (d) 31st December, 2024

2. What is the due date for conducting AGM for Golden Limited for the year
       ended March 31, 2024?

       (a) 30th September, 2024

       (b) 31st October, 2024

       (c) 30th November, 2024

       (d) 31st December, 2024

3. The Companies Act, 2013 provides that in addition to standalone financial
       statement, the company shall also prepare consolidated financial statements
       which shall also be presented at AGM. Accordingly, the consolidated financial
       statements of Golden Limited for the financial year ended 31st March, 2023
       includes, financial statements:

       (a) Golden Limited and D Limited

       (b) Golden Limited, D Limited and E Limited

       (c) Golden Limited, D Limited, E Limited and XYZ & Co., partnership firm

       (d) Golden Limited, D Limited, E Limited, F Limited and XYZ & Co.,
               partnership firm

4. The Companies Act, 2013 provides that in addition to standalone financial
       statement, the company shall also prepare consolidated financial statements
                      CASE SCENARIOS           CS.3

       which shall also be presented before AGM. Accordingly, the consolidated
       financial statements of Golden Limited for the financial year ended 31st
       March, 2024 includes:

       (a) Golden Limited and D Limited

       (b) Golden Limited, D Limited and E Limited

       (c) Golden Limited, D Limited, E Limited and XYZ & Co., partnership firm

       (d) Golden Limited, D Limited, E Limited, F Limited and XYZ & Co.,
               partnership firm

5. Please select which is the correct option/ which is the most correct statement:

       (a) Golden Limited had given the notice for holding AGM in Mumbai on
               Monday, 26th September, 2024 at 11.00 A.M.

       (b) Golden Limited had given the notice for holding AGM in Delhi on
               Monday, 26th September, 2024 at 11.00 A.M.

       (c) Golden Limited had given the notice for holding AGM in Noida on
               Tuesday, 27th September, 2024 at 11.00 A.M.

       (d) Golden Limited had given the notice for holding AGM in Delhi on
               Monday, 26th September, 2024 at 8.30 A.M.

Answer

1.      (d)  2.  (a)  3.  (c)         4.  (d)        5.  (b)

Case Scenario 2

Perfect Tyres and Rubbers Ltd. is a listed entity engaged in the business of
manufacturing of tyres and tubes for Light and Heavy Commercial Vehicles. During
the financial year 2023-24, the company has declared interim dividend of 5% on
the equity shares in its Board meeting held on 17th October, 2023, out of the profits
earned during the first quarter of FY 2023-24. Further, the Board of Directors of the
company after reviewing results of the fourth quarter of FY 2023-24 again
recommended for second Interim Dividend @ 5% on 25th April, 2024.

The Board of Directors of the company approved the financial result for the FY
2023-24 in its meeting held on 5th August, 2024, and recommended a final dividend
    CS.4     CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

of 15% (including the interim dividends paid earlier) in this board meeting. The
general meeting of the shareholders was convened on 31st August, 2024. The
shareholders of the company demanded that since interim dividend @10% (5% +
5%) was declared by the company, so the final dividend should not be less than
20% (including the interim dividends). When the Company Secretary emphasised
that final dividend cannot exceed, what the Board of Directors have recommended
in their board meeting, some of the shareholders boycotted the meeting and
moved out of the meeting hall, in protest of the company's decision. However, the
agenda for declaration of the dividend was passed unanimously by rest of the
shareholders present in the meeting hall, fulfilling the criteria of requirement of
quorum, as per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.

After approval of the shareholders, the dividend amount was paid to the
shareholders, however dividend to some of the shareholders could not be paid
within the prescribed period for variety of reasons. The company transferred the
unpaid dividend amount to a separate bank account on 15th October, 2024.

The details of the unpaid dividend amount for the previous year's lying in the
unpaid dividend account is as under:

S. Dividend  Date of         Date when the   Amount lying in
                               amount was       the Unpaid
No. pertaining declaration   transferred to       Dividend
                                                  Account
    to the FY of Dividend   Unpaid dividend     (` in lakhs)
                                 Account            92.50
1   2019-20 31.08.2024                              85.14
                                15.10.2024          80.00
2   2018-19 25.08.2023          28.09.2023          75.25
                                22.09.2022          45.15
3   2017-18 20.08.2022          07.10.2021          35.26
                                04.10.2020          15.10
4   2016-17 05.09.2021          09.10.2019          07.25
                                08.06.2018
5   2015-16 01.09.2020          08.07.2017

6   2014-15 07.09.2019

7   2013-14 05.05.2018

8.  2012-13 06.06.2017

Sustram, one of the investors who is holding 1000 shares in physical form, by
visiting web-site of the company, came to know that company had declared the
dividends in some previous years, but have not been paid to him. This happened
CASE SCENARIOS  CS.5

due to the fact the company was not having his current address and bank account
details. Sustram approached the company, along with all the supporting evidence
to his claim and demanded the dividend amount.

The company after being satisfied, paid all the dividend amount pertaining to the
FY 2017-18 to FY 2023-24. However, for FY 2016-17, the company informed that
since the amount of dividend has been transferred to Investor Education and
Protection Fund, it cannot be taken back now. Aggrieved from this, Sustram
threatened the company officials to take appropriate legal action.

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct answer (one out of
four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -

1. When the shareholders demanded for increase in the rate of dividend, but
       since the shareholders cannot increase the rate of dividend what the Board
       of Directors have recommended, some of them walked out of the meeting
       hall. What shall be the consequences of it:

       (a) If, even after boycott, quorum is present, all the time during the course
               of general meeting and they have approved with majority, the rate
               recommended by the Board shall be treated as approved.

       (b) Members present at the beginning of the meeting shall remain present
               all the time during the general meeting, to approve any agenda, else it
               will be treated as nullified.

       (c) The approval of the dividend is an ordinary business resolution of the
               company, so if some of the members have boycotted the meeting, it
               will have no effect, even if the quorum is not present.

       (d) The recommendation of the Board of Directors of the company relating
               to the rate of dividend shall stands withdrawn.

2. At which date, the unpaid dividend not claimed by the shareholders, shall be
       transferred to a separate bank account, in the above case:

       (a) On 5th August, 2024 (the date of Meeting of Board)

       (b) On 31st August, 2024 (the date of Meeting of Shareholders)

       (c) On 30th September, 2024 (the date, after 30 days from the meeting of
               shareholders)
             CS.6           CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (d) Latest by 7th October, 2024 (within seven days from the date of expiry
               of 30 days)

3. The company transferred the amount of unpaid dividend to a separate bank
       account on 15th October, 2024.

       What is the interest liability on the part of the company?

       (a) No liability.

       (b) Interest @ 10% p.a. on so much of the amount as has not been
               transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account.

       (c) Interest @ 12% p.a. on so much of the amount as has not been
               transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account.

       (d) Interest @ 15% p.a. on so much of the amount as has not been
               transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account.

4. In the given case, when and how much amount, the company shall transfer
       the funds to the Investor Education and Protection Fund:

       (a) Four years after 01.09.2020; ` 45.15 lakh

       (b) Five years after 07.09.2019; ` 35.26 lakh

       (c) Six years after 05.05.2018; ` 15.10 lakh

       (d) Seven years after 08.07.2017: ` 07.25 lakh

Answer

1.      (a)        2.  (d)  3.  (c)  4.  (d)

Case Scenario 3

Modern Limited is a company limited by shares that manufactures furniture items
apart from material used in modular kitchens. Modern Limited is an unlisted
company with a registered office in Mumbai, Maharashtra. It has a corporate office
in Delhi and branch offices throughout the country. Following are facts regarding
the 18th annual general meeting (AGM) of Modern Limited.

Modern Limited is the lead sponsor of the furniture trade event India Furniture
EXPO 2024 and a member of the Association of Furniture Manufacturers and
CASE SCENARIOS  CS.7

Traders. Modern Limited, on behalf of the Association, booked the Expo Hall in
Mumbai for the event and also decided to convene its 18th AGM at the same hall
after the conclusion of EXPO 2024.

But later, they found that the India Furniture Expo 2024, which was scheduled to be
held from September 16­19, 2024, had to be postponed as Bombay Municipal
Corporation (BMC) continued to occupy the hall as a vaccination center. Therefore,
Modern Limited has to rethink its plan and now convene its 18th annual general
meeting on September 27, 2024, at the IMA Auditorium in Delhi, near its corporate
office. All the members consented to same. The notice of the said meeting was
posted on September 5, 2024, specifying place, date and day, in additions to
business to be transacted. In case of Mr. Ashok, who is declared insolvent but
undischarged, notice was sent to assignee, while a wilful omission was made in
giving notice in case of Ms. Anjum.

At the meeting, Mr. Singh was elected as chairman of the meeting by a show of
hands, while Mr. Manohar registered his dissent on the appointment of Mr. Singh
as chairman of the meeting and sought a poll to elect the chairperson. Mr. Manohar
has substantial voting right of company being part of promoter group. A poll was
held to elect the chairman of the meeting, and Mr. Singh voted twice in his capacity
as a member as well as chairman while the poll was taking place. Mr. Singh was
elected chairman through the poll as well, by overwhelming majority.

Ms. Varnika, who is not a member of company, attended the meeting as Mr. Alok's
proxy, voted both times: when Mr. Singh was elected by show of hands and when
he was elected by poll. When she initially voted, she raised her hand in favour of
electing Mr. Singh as chairman of the meeting, while during the election through a
poll, she cast a vote against.

Mr. Manohar raises the question on a vote that is casted by Mr. Singh in his capacity
as chairman, hence he pass the remarks on him and his allies; which can be
considered defamatory in nature. Chairman at his opinion, instructed the company
secretary to exclude the remarks passed by Mr. Manohar while preparing the
minutes; but some members raised a voice against the discretion of Mr. Singh,
because they find remarks didn't carry any matter which can be considered
defamatory, while some other members feel remarks are made with intent to
defame chairman.
CS.8  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct answer (one out of
four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -

1. Regarding the notice of meeting given by Modern Limited, you are required
       to pick the correct option in light of provisions of the Companies Act, 2013
       and rules notified thereunder.

       I Modern Limited observe the length of notice, as required.

       II Notice shall be given to member irrespective he is solvent, adjudged or
               declared insolvent, or discharged insolvent; Modern Limited committed
               default

       III Notice shall be given to assignee of insolvent member, Modern Limited
               correctly did so

       IV Wilful omission in giving notice will invalidate the proceeding of the
               meeting in case of Modern Limited

       Options

       (a) Only I, II and IV are correct

       (b) Only III and IV are correct

       (c) Only I is correct

       (d) Only IV is correct
2. Regarding the place of 18th AGM of Modern Limited, decide whether

       applicable provisions violated or not; in light of provisions of the Companies
       Act, 2013 and rules notified thereunder.

       (a) Violation, because Modern Limited shall convene and conduct AGM
               only at its registered office

       (b) Violation, because AGM shall be held either at the registered office of
               the company or at some other place within the city, town or village in
               which the registered office of the company is situate

       (c) No violation, because AGM shall be held either at the register or
               corporate office of the company or even at some other place within the
               city, town or village in which the registered or corporate office of the
               company is situate
                      CASE SCENARIOS           CS.9

       (d) No violation, because AGM of the said company may be held at any
               place in India

3. Regarding vote casted by Ms Varnika, which of following statements hold
       truth; in light of provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 and rules notified
       thereunder.

       (a) Being proxy Ms. Varnika is not allowed to cast vote on a poll, while she
               can cast vote by show of hand

       (b) Being proxy Ms. Varnika is not allowed to cast vote by show of hand,
               while she can cast vote on a poll

       (c) Despite being non-member Ms. Varnika can be proxy, but can't cast
               vote either by show of hand or on a poll

       (d) Ms. Varnika can cast vote in both the cases; by show of hand as well as
               on a poll

4. Regarding the inclusion/exclusion of the remarks by Mr. Manohar, advice the
       company secretary; which of the following statement hold truth, in light of
       provisions of the Companies Act 2013 and rules notified thereunder.

       (a) Mr. Manohar's remark shall be included in minutes because minutes
               shall contain fair summary of the proceedings

       (b) Mr. Manohar's remark shall be excluded from minutes because remarks
               are made with intent to defame chairman, the chairman's opinion of
               inclusion and exclusion is immaterial in such case

       (c) Mr. Manohar's remark shall be excluded from minutes because
               chairman has absolute discretion to exclude any matter which is
               defamatory in his opinion

       (d) Mr. Manohar's remark shall be included in minutes because many
               members challenge the chairman's opinion and feels remarks were not
               defamatory

Answer

1.      (b)  2.  (d)  3.  (b)         4.  (c)
CS.10                 CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Case Scenario 4

ACC Private Limited was incorporated in July 2001. Its shares are listed on BSE and
NSE. It is registered with an authorised share capital of ` 20 crore divided into 2
crore equity shares of ` 10/- each. The paid-up share capital of the company is
` 10 crore divided into 1 crore equity shares of ` 10/- each.

The Board of Directors of the company in their meeting held on 11th August, 2024
declared interim dividend. The Annual General Meeting of the company was held
on 1st September, 2024. The company had incurred losses in the previous financial
year as well as in the current financial year upto the period ended June 30, 2024. In
the previous five financial years, the company had declared the dividend as under:

Financial Year Ended  Dividend declared per  Dividend declared rate
                               share (`)                  (%)

March 31, 2024        Nil                       Nil

March 31, 2023        1.00                      10%

March 31, 2022        1.10                      11%

March 31, 2021        1.30                      13%

March 31, 2020        1.20                      12%

The company has deposited the amount of dividend declared in a separate account
with ABC Bank on August 14, 2024. Out of the total dividend declared, ` 60,000
payable to few equity shareholders remains unclaimed even after the expiry of
statutory period within which dividend was required to be paid and had been
transferred to a separate bank account Unpaid Dividend Account on 20th
September 2024. The company prepares a statement containing the names of
shareholders, their last known address and the unpaid dividend amount to such
each shareholder and place on its website.

Meanwhile, the company obtained a term loan of ` 15 crore from Laxmi Bank
Limited on August 20, 2024, securing it with a charge on the company's assets,
including its own buildings (in India and Germany) and intangible assets (trademark
right over the company's logo). According to the Companies Act, 2013, the
company was required to register this charge with the Registrar within a specified
        CASE SCENARIOS  CS.11

timeframe. However, the company failed to complete the registration process
within the prescribed timeline.

The Board of Directors has requested their Company Secretary to confirm them
whether they are required to incur expenditure towards Corporate Social
Responsibility during the financial year 2024-2025 and is required to constitute CSR
committee.

The financial particulars in respect of immediately preceding financial year are as
under:

S. No.  Particulars  Amount (` in crore)
   1    Net worth               100
   2     Turnover              1010
   3     Net Profit             4.9
   4    Borrowings               60

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct answer (one out of
four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -

1. The company can create charge in favour of the lender on the assets which
       are:

       (a) Tangible Assets and situated in India only

       (b) Intangible Assets and situated in India only

       (c) Assets that are tangible or otherwise and situated in India or Germany

       (d) Assets that are tangible or otherwise and situated in India only

2. The maximum rate at which interim dividend can be declared by the Board
       during the current financial year is as under: -

       (a) The board cannot declare the interim dividend at a rate higher than the
               average dividend declared by the company immediately during
               preceding two financial years, i.e. 5%.

       (b) The board cannot declare the interim dividend at a rate higher than the
               average dividend declared by the company immediately during
               preceding three financial years, i.e. 7%.
CS.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (c) The board cannot declare the interim dividend at a rate higher than the
               average dividend declared by the company immediately during
               preceding four financial years, i.e. 8.5%.

       (d) The board cannot declare the interim dividend at a rate higher than the
               average dividend declared by the company immediately during
               preceding five financial years, i.e. 9.2%.

3. In respect of dividend declared which of the Statement is not correct?

       (a) The company has transferred the dividend amount to separate bank
               account within 5 days from the date of declaration of dividend

       (b) The company is required to pay dividend within 30 days from the date
               of declaration of dividend

       (c) The company is required to transfer the Unpaid dividend to a separate
               bank account within 10 days from the date of expiry of statutory period
               from the date of declaration of dividend

       (d) The company is required to prepare a statement containing the names
               of shareholders, their last known address and the unpaid dividend
               amount to such each shareholder and place on its website within 90
               days from the date of transferring the amount to Unpaid Dividend
               Account

4. Choose the correct option in terms that whether the provisions of Corporate
       Social Responsibility are applicable to ACC Private Limited.

       (a) The provisions of Corporate Social Responsibility are not applicable to
               ACC Private Limited as it is a private limited company

       (b) Yes, as ACC Private Limited is having turnover of more than ` 1000 crore

       (c) Yes, as ACC Private Limited is having net profit of more than ` 2.5 crore
               in the immediately preceding financial year

       (d) Yes, as ACC Private Limited is having net worth of more than ` 50 crore
               in the immediately preceding financial year

5. The notice for the Annual General Meeting should be served by:

       (a) 6th August 2024
       (b) 7th August 2024
                          CASE SCENARIOS           CS.13

    (c) 8th August 2024
    (d) 10th August 2024

Answer

1.      (c)  2.  (b)      3.  (c)         4.  (b)         5  (a)

Case Scenario 5

Tejas Infra Limited was incorporated by Tejasvi Singh and his wife Meenakshi along
with seven other family members in the year 2001 with an aim to undertake
infrastructure projects relating to transportation in the country. The company had
successfully completed construction of roads and canals in Delhi, UP and
Chandigarh and rose to become one of the prominent construction companies in
India.

The Registered Office of the company is situated in Connaught Place, New Delhi
with a capital base of ` 100 crore divided into ten crore equity shares of `10 each.
The company has eight directors of which three are independent directors. In the
year 2019, the company got new projects from the State Government of Punjab to
build four flyovers and underpasses in different cities of Punjab.

In order to increase its capital base, Tejas Infra Limited decided to issue 1,00,000
preference shares of ` 100 each to the existing shareholders. For this, purpose it
was decided to increase the Authorised Capital by ` 500,00,000 divided into
5,00,000 shares of ` 100 each.

The projects went off well and the turnover rose to the tune of ` 3600 crore in the
immediately preceding financial year 2022-23. The net worth of the company stood
at ` 550 crore.

As they crossed the threshold limit in the immediately preceding financial year
2022-23, a Board level Committee headed by one of the independent directors,
namely, Paritosh was constituted to allocate budget, review the progress and
provide guidance on various Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and
sustainability initiatives. It was decided to spend the requisite amount towards skill
development, vocational training, provision of safe drinking water facility, etc.
Lokesh, one of the directors, is also a member of this Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee. He is in favour of Janta Andolan Manch, a political party.
CS.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

This party is quite prominent in undertaking social work. As per his advice, the
Board by a unanimous resolution resolved to contribute ` 5,00,000 to the said
political party i.e. Janta Andolan Manch and to treat such contribution as part of
CSR activity.

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct answer (one out of
four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -

1. From the case scenario, it is evident that Tejas Infra Limited decided to issue
       1,00,000 preference shares of ` 100 each to the existing shareholders. From
       the options given below choose the one which indicates the maximum period
       which is permitted to the company for redemption of preference shares.

       (a) Tejas Infra Limited being involved in infrastructural activities is
               permitted to specify maximum period of thirty-five years for
               redemption of preference shares subject to the condition that it shall
               redeem minimum 20% of preference shares per year commencing from
               31st year onwards or earlier, on proportionate basis at the option of
               preference shareholders.

       (b) Tejas Infra Limited being involved in infrastructural activities is
               permitted to specify maximum period of thirty-five years for
               redemption of preference shares subject to the condition that it shall
               redeem minimum 10% of preference shares per year commencing from
               26th year onwards or earlier, on proportionate basis at the option of
               preference shareholders.

       (c) Tejas Infra Limited being involved in infrastructural activities is
               permitted to specify maximum period of thirty years for redemption of
               preference shares subject to the condition that it shall redeem minimum
               10% of preference shares per year commencing from 21st year onwards
               or earlier, on proportionate basis, at the option of preference
               shareholders.

       (d) Tejas Infra Limited being involved in infrastructural activities is
               permitted to specify maximum period of thirty years for redemption of
               preference shares subject to the condition that it shall redeem minimum
               20% of preference shares per year commencing from 26th year onwards
CASE SCENARIOS  CS.15

               or earlier, on proportionate basis, at the option of preference
               shareholders.

2. The case scenario states that the turnover of Tejas Infra Limited rose to the
       tune of ` 3600 crore and net worth of the company stood at ` 550 crore in
       the immediately preceding financial year 2022-23 which required formation
       of CSR Committee. What is the third criterion which if crossed shall also
       require that a CSR Committee be formed. Choose the correct option from
       those stated below:

       (a) The third criterion which also requires formation of CSR Committee is
               that the company has net profit of ` two crore or more in the
               immediately preceding financial year.

       (b) The third criterion which also requires formation of CSR Committee is
               that the company has net profit of ` three crore or more in the
               immediately preceding financial year.

       (c) The third criterion which also requires formation of CSR Committee is
               that the company has net profit of ` five crore or more in the
               immediately preceding financial year.

       (d) The third criterion which also requires formation of CSR Committee is
               that the company has net profit of ` six crore or more in the immediately
               preceding financial year.

3. According to the legal provisions, it is mandatory to redeem preference
       shares at the stipulated time. Keeping in view the above case scenario, which
       source is required to be used by Tejas Infra Limited for the redemption of
       outstanding preference shares:

       (a) Tejas Infra Limited is required to redeem preference shares out of the
               profits which would otherwise be available for dividend.

       (b) Tejas Infra Limited is required to redeem preference shares out of the
               proceeds of a fresh issue of shares made for the purposes of such
               redemption.

       (c) Both (a) and (b).

       (d) Tejas Infra Limited is required to redeem preference shares out of its
               Capital Redemption Reserve.
             CS.16       CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

4. While constituting a CSR Committee, how many minimum directors are
       required to be appointed by Tejas Infra Limited:

       (a) CSR Committee formed by Tejas Infra Limited shall have minimum two
               directors.

       (b) CSR Committee formed by Tejas Infra Limited shall have minimum three
               directors of which at least one director shall be an independent director.

       (c) CSR Committee formed by Tejas Infra Limited shall have minimum four
               directors of which at least one director shall be an independent director.

       (d) CSR Committee formed by Tejas Infra Limited shall have minimum four
               directors of which at least two directors shall be independent director.

Answer

1.      (c)  2.     (c)  3.  (c)  4.  (b)

Case Scenario 6

GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd., a technology giant with operations in software development,
hardware manufacturing, and IT consulting, has recorded significant financial
growth over the past few years. For the financial year 2023-2024, the company
reported the following financial metrics:

 Net worth: ` 520 crore

 Turnover: ` 1,050 crore

 Net profit: ` 4.5 crore

In the financial year 2022-2023, GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd. had a net worth of ` 480 crore,
a turnover of ` 1,020 crore, and a net profit of ` 4 crore. The company has a
subsidiary, TechSubs Ltd., and a foreign subsidiary, GlobalTech International, which
has a branch office in India.

GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd. spent ` 1.2 crore on various CSR activities during the financial
year 2023-2024. However, ` 30 lakh remained unspent and was transferred to the
Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account as per section 135(6) of the
Companies Act, 2013.
CASE SCENARIOS  CS.17

The company's board comprises members from different parts of the country and
they ensure that the administrative overheads do not exceed the prescribed limit
of total CSR expenditure.
The company held its annual general meeting on 20th August, 2024 and filed the
annual return in compliance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct answer (one out of
four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -

1. Based on the financial metrics of GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd., is the company
       required to constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Committee for
       the for the financial year 2023-2024?

       (a) Yes, because its net worth exceeds ` 500 crore.

       (b) No, because it has not met the required net profit criteria.

       (c) Yes, because its turnover exceeds ` 1,000 crore.

       (d) No, because its net profit is less than ` 5 crore.

2. Given that GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd. has ` 30 lakh in its Unspent Corporate Social
       Responsibility Account, which of the following statements is true?

       (a) The company is not required to constitute a CSR Committee if it has
               unspent CSR funds.

       (b) The company must constitute a CSR Committee in Financial year 2024-
               2025, as it has balance in Unspent CSR account.

       (c) The company can use the unspent funds for any other business activity.

       (d) The company must transfer the unspent amount to the Prime Minister's
               National Relief Fund.

3. If GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd. had an average net profit of ` 5 crore over the past
       three immediately preceding financial years, what is the minimum amount it
       must spend on CSR activities in the financial year 2024-2025?

       (a) ` 5 lakh

       (b) ` 10 lakh

       (c) ` 20 lakh
             CS.18       CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (d) ` 30 lakh
4. GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd. must ensure that the administrative overheads do not

       exceed a certain percentage of the total CSR expenditure. What is this
       percentage?
       (a) 2%

       (b) 5%
       (c) 10%
       (d) 15%

5. What is the latest date by which GlobalTech Pvt. Ltd. must it file its annual
       return with the Registrar of Companies (RoC)?
       (a) 10th September 2024
       (b) 15th September 2024
       (c) 10th October 2024
       (d) 19th October 2024

Answer

1.      (c)  2.     (b)  3.  (b)  4.  (b)          5  (d)

Case Scenario 7

GreenLeaf LLP is a limited liability partnership engaged in the business of eco-
friendly product manufacturing. The LLP was initially established with three
partners: Priya, Sameer, and EcoCorp Ltd., a corporate entity. Priya and Sameer are
the designated partners, with Priya being a resident in India. EcoCorp Ltd. has
appointed Anil, an individual, as its nominee to act on its behalf.

After a few years, Sameer decides to retire, leaving Priya and EcoCorp Ltd. as the
remaining partners. Due to some administrative oversight, GreenLeaf LLP continues
its operations without appointing a new partner. This situation persists for seven
months, with Priya being aware of the reduced number of partners. During this
period, GreenLeaf LLP enters into several contracts and incurs significant financial
obligations.
CASE SCENARIOS  CS.19

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct
answer (one out of four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -

1. Given that Sameer retired and GreenLeaf LLP continued with only Priya and
       EcoCorp Ltd., what should GreenLeaf LLP have done within six months to
       comply with the LLP Act?

       (a) Dissolved the LLP

       (b) Continue operating with one designated partner

       (c) Appoint at least one body corporate which should be a foreign
               company

       (d) Appointed at least one more partner who should also be a designated
               partner, as every LLP should have at least two designated partners

2. According to the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, choose the correct
       statement in relation to who must be a resident in India among the
       designated partners?

       (a) At least one individual designated partner shall be resident in India

       (b) All designated partners shall only be resident in India

       (c) It is mandatory for only corporate partners to be resident in India

       (d) At least four designated partners shall be resident in India

3. In the given case scenario suppose EcoCorp Ltd. also leaves the LLP and the
       LLP continues business for more than six months with only one partner, who
       is personally liable for the obligations incurred during that period?

       (a) Priya

       (b) Both Priya and EcoCorp Ltd.

       (c) EcoCorp Ltd.

       (d) Priya, Sameer and EcoCorp Ltd.
             CS.20       CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

Answer

1.      (d)  2.     (a)  3.  (a)

Case scenario 8

Greenfield LLP and Bluewave LLP were two thriving businesses operating in the
renewable energy sector. Greenfield LLP specialized in solar panel manufacturing,
while Bluewave LLP was known for its innovations in wind turbine technology. Both
companies saw a strategic opportunity to join forces and create a more
comprehensive renewable energy solution provider. They decided to merge into a
single entity, to be named EcoFuture LLP.

To facilitate this merger, the management of both companies proposed a scheme
of compromise and arrangement under Section 60 of the LLP Act. They approached
the Tribunal to sanction this scheme, which involved transferring all assets,
liabilities, and ongoing legal proceedings of both Greenfield LLP and Bluewave LLP
to EcoFuture LLP.

The Tribunal reviewed the proposal and found that the merger scheme was
designed for the reconstruction and amalgamation of Greenfield LLP and Bluewave
LLP. The Tribunal issued an order under Section 62, sanctioning the scheme and
setting forth several provisions to ensure a smooth transition:

1. All assets and liabilities of Greenfield LLP and Bluewave LLP were to be
       transferred to EcoFuture LLP.

2. Any ongoing legal proceedings involving either of the original LLPs would
       continue under the name of EcoFuture LLP.

3. Both Greenfield LLP and Bluewave LLP would be dissolved without the need
       for winding up.

However, a few partners from Greenfield LLP were not in favor of the merger. They
dissented from the compromise and arrangement. The Tribunal provided specific
directions to ensure that their interests were adequately addressed.

After the order was made, both LLPs had to file a certified copy of the Tribunal's
order with the Registrar within 30 days for registration. Unfortunately, due to some
administrative delays, this filing was not completed within the stipulated time,
leading to penalties for both EcoFuture LLP and its designated partners.
                      CASE SCENARIOS  CS.21

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 and the applicable Rules therein, choose the correct
answer (one out of four) of the following MCQs given herein under: -
1. What was the main purpose of the scheme proposed between Greenfield LLP

       and Bluewave LLP?
       (a) To dissolve both LLPs
       (b) To transfer all assets to a third party
       (c) For the reconstruction and amalgamation of the LLPs
       (d) To liquidate the companies
2. What authority does the Tribunal have when it sanctions a compromise or
       arrangement under Section 60?
       (a) It can only supervise the arrangement
       (b) It has no authority after sanctioning the arrangement
       (c) It can supervise, modify, and give directions for the arrangement
       (d) It can dissolve the LLPs directly without any conditions
3. What penalty applies if an LLP fails to comply with the 30-day filing
       requirement?
       (a) Immediate dissolution of the LLP
       (b) A fine of `10,000 and additional penalties for continuing contravention
       (c) Suspension of all business activities
       (d) Revocation of the Tribunal's order

Answer

1.      (c)  2.  (c)  3.  (b)

Case Scenario 9

The government has recently enacted several new laws aimed at promoting
environmental conservation and for safety of the people. However, due to the
complexity of these laws, there's confusion among the citizens regarding certain
CS.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

provisions and their applicability. The Indian Legal Society decides to organize a
seminar to educate the public on the General Clauses Act, 1897, which provides
interpretation rules for statutes.

You, as a participant, are given a set of MCQs to test your understanding on the
enforcement of the newly enacted laws.

On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the General
Clauses Act, 1897, choose the correct answer (one out of four) of the following
MCQs given herein under: -

1. In the context of the General Clauses Act, 1897, section 3, which deals with
       the interpretation of the term "person", state which statement is comprising
       of correct set of person:

       (a) Company, housing societies, and charitable trusts

       (b) Club, Group of person waiting for a bus, Firms

       (c) Statutory body, Corporation, Partnership firm

       (d) The term person is not defined under the Act

2. According to the General Clauses Act, 1897, when does the provision for
       gender interpretation apply?

       (a) Only in statutes enacted after 1897

       (b) Only in statutes enacted before 1897

       (c) To all statutes, regardless of enactment date

       (d) Only in specific cases mentioned in the Act

3. Which as per the section of the General Clauses Act, 1897, provides correct
       legal requirements for the computation of time mentioned in statutes?

       (a) Rules for computing time shall be as mentioned in the General Clauses
               Act, including the exclusion of the first and inclusion of the last day

       (b) Rules for computing time mentioned in statutes, including the first and
               excluding of the last day

       (c) Rules for computing time mentioned in General Clauses Act, excluding
               the first and including of the last day
                      CASE SCENARIOS           CS.23

       (d) Rules for computing time mentioned in statutes, including the exclusion
               of the first and inclusion of the last day

4. In the General Clauses Act, 1897, what does "expressions referring to writing
       shall be construed as including references to printing, lithography,
       photography, and other modes of representing or reproducing words in
       visible form" means?

       (a) It only applies to statutes enacted after the advent of lithography

       (b) It applies to all statutes and includes modern methods of reproducing
               words

       (c) It excludes printing and lithography from interpretation

       (d) It is applicable only to specific cases mentioned in the Act

5. According to the General Clauses Act, 1897, what is the rule regarding repeal
       and savings clauses in statutes?

       (a) Repeal clauses have no effect if not expressly provided

       (b) Savings clauses prevail over repeal clauses

       (c) Repeal and savings clauses have equal effect

       (d) Savings clauses are only applicable if expressly provided

Answer

1.      (a)  2.  (c)  3.  (d)         4.  (b)  5.     (b)

Case Scenario 10

Amit, an Indian resident during the Financial Year (FY) 2021-2022, decided to
pursue higher studies in Biotechnology in Switzerland. On 15th July 2022, he left
India to begin his two-year academic program. The determination of Amit's
residential status under the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999, for
the Financial Years 2022-2023 and 2023-2024, is crucial to understand his
obligations and entitlements concerning foreign exchange transactions.

In terms of financial requirements, Amit needs USD 25,000 annually to cover his
tuition fees. Additionally, he requires USD 30,000 annually for incidental expenses
and living costs while studying abroad. Thus, his total annual requirement amounts
             CS.24       CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

to USD 55,000, making it imperative to assess the provisions under the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999, that govern the remittance of foreign.
On the basis of above facts and by applying applicable provisions of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999, choose the correct answer (one out of four) of
the following MCQs given herein under: -
1. What would be Amit's residential status for FY 2022-2023 under FEMA, 1999?

       (a) Resident in India
       (b) Non-Resident Indian (NRI)
       (c) Person of Indian Origin (PIO)
       (d) Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)
2. What would be Amit's residential status for FY 2023-2024 under FEMA, 1999?
       (a) Resident in India
       (b) Non-Resident Indian (NRI)
       (c) Person of Indian Origin (PIO)
       (d) Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)
3. Suppose now Amit wants more money for his living cost abroad. What is the
       maximum amount that can still be remitted abroad per financial year under
       the Liberalized Remittance Scheme (LRS)?
       (a) USD 100,000
       (b) USD 195,000
       (c) USD 200,000
       (d) USD 500,000

Answer

1.      (b)  2.     (b)  3.  (b)
