CHAPTER  1

INDIAN REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK

                                            LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:
 Meaning of Law and its sources
 Types of laws in the Indian Legal System
 Enforcement of Law
 Introduction of Major Regulatory Bodies such as Ministry of

       Finance, MCA, SEBI, RBI, IBBI and Ministry of Law and Justice.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            1.2  BUSINESS LAWS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

   Indian         What is Law?                     Sources of Law    Criminal Law
Regulatory
Framework        Enforcement of                       Process of       Civil Law
                        Law                        making a Law
                                                                    Common Law
                       Major                        Types of Law     Principles of
                   Regulatory                                       Natural Justice
                                                     Ministry of
                      Bodies                            Finance
                   Structure of
                 Indian Judicial                         MCA

                      System                              SEBI

                                                          RBI

                                                          IBBI

                                                   Ministry of Law
                                                     and Justice

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                        1.3

    1. INTRODUCTION

Have you ever wondered why you are studying this subject called law? Is it only because it
has been prescribed in the syllabus or is it because you will need this knowledge as a
member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India?

Awareness of law is essential to become a full-fledged Chartered Accountant. This is
because a Chartered Accountant is the first level of contact on many legal matters. So, we
should possess knowledge of law so that we can advise our management and clients on
legal matters at a basic or threshold level.

The purpose of a regulatory framework is to provide a set of uniform rules and regulations
that will govern the conduct of people interacting with each other in personal as well as
business relationships.

Down the ages, mankind has evolved from a hunter- gatherer society through agriculture
and industrial revolution to a complex social framework. Throughout this journey, we have
always needed laws and regulations to guide us on the right course of conduct as well as to
identify violations and punish them.

If we talk about ancient law, on the basis of information available from different sources
"Code of Hammurabi" is known for oldest law in written form. King Hammurabi ruled
Babylon for the period from 1792 BC to 1758 BC. He carved the code on bulky stone slabs
and ordered to place those stones on different places all over the city so that the public may
have the knowledge of codes. He also appointed judges to check whether public is following
the laws or not.

In 450 BC, a set of laws was engraved on 12 bronze tablets in Rome which is considered as
first most detailed code of any of the civilisations and called Twelve Tables. The purpose of
these tables was to protect the rights of public and to provide remedy for wrongs. All the
citizens of Rome were supposed to have the knowledge of these tables. Over the time, many
amendments were done in these laws as per the requirements.

In this subject, you will be introduced to many laws. Therefore, in this chapter we will first
understand how these laws are made and how they are implemented.

    2. WHAT IS LAW?

Law is a set of obligations and duties imposed by the government for securing welfare and
providing justice to society. India's legal framework reflects the social, political, economic,
and cultural aspects of our vast and diversified country.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.4  BUSINESS LAWS

    3. SOURCES OF LAW

The main sources of law in India are the Constitution, the statutes or laws made by
Parliament and State Assemblies, Precedents or the Judicial Decisions of various Courts and
in some cases, established Customs and Usages.

You must be aware that India is a parliamentary democracy. We have a constitution which is
the basis and source for all laws. We elect our representatives to the parliament as well as to
the legislative assemblies of various States. These representatives of the people make laws
in parliament or in their state assemblies as the case may be. So, Parliament is the ultimate
law-making body. The laws passed by parliament may apply throughout all or a portion of
India, whereas the laws passed by state legislatures apply only within the borders of the
states concerned.

The Government of India Act, 1935, passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom is the
precursor for the Constitution of India. It defined the characteristics of the Government from
"unitary" to "federal". Powers were distributed between Centre and State to avoid any
disputes. In 1937, Federal Court was established and had the jurisdiction of appellate,
original and advisory. The powers of Appellate Jurisdiction extended to civil and criminal
cases whereas the Advisory Jurisdiction was extended with the powers to Federal Court to
advise Governor-General in matters of public opinion. The Federal Court operated for 12
years and heard roughly 151 cases. The Federal Court was supplanted by India's current
Apex Court, the Supreme Court of India.

The Constitution of India, 1950 is the foremost law that deals with the framework within
which our democratic system works, and our laws are made for the people, by the people.
The Constitution also provides for and protects certain Fundamental rights of citizens. It also
lays down Fundamental duties as well as the powers and duties of Governments, both
Central and State. The laws in India are interconnected with each other forming a hybrid
legal system.

The people who wrote the Constitution decided to divide the law-making power between
the Central Government and the various State Governments. So, the Indian Constitution has
three lists Viz., Central List, State List and Joint List.

Depending on the list in which it figures a matter would become the subject for Central law
or a State law. For example, Income Tax is a Central subject. So, throughout India we have
only one law for Income Tax which is implemented by the Central Government through the
Ministry of Finance. We also have matters for which both Central as well as State
Governments can pass laws. Levy of stamp duty is such an example. Both Central
Government and State Government have laws governing Levy of stamp duty.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              INDIAN REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                      1.5

    4. THE PROCESS OF MAKING A LAW

When a law is proposed in parliament it is called a Bill. After discussion and debate, the law
is passed in Lok Sabha. Thereafter, it has to be passed in Rajya Sabha. It then has to obtain
the assent of the President of India. Finally, the law will be notified by the Government in the
publication called the Official Gazette of India. The law will become applicable from the date
mentioned in the notification as the effective date. Once it is notified and effective, it is
called an Act of Parliament.

Types of laws in the Indian Legal System

The laws in the Indian legal system could be broadly classified as follows:

                                                     Types of laws

Criminal Law  Civil Law                            Common Law   Principles of
                                                               Natural Justice

Criminal Law

Criminal law is concerned with laws pertaining to violations of the rule of law or public
wrongs and punishment of the same. Criminal Law is governed under the Indian Penal Code,
1860, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Crpc). The Indian Penal Code, 1860, defines
the crime, its nature, and punishments whereas the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, defines
exhaustive procedure for executing the punishments of the crimes.

Murder, rape, theft, fraud, cheating and assault are some examples of criminal offences
under the law.

Civil Law

Matters of disputes between individuals or organisations are dealt with under Civil Law. Civil
courts enforce the violation of certain rights and obligations through the institution of a civil
suit. Civil law primarily focuses on dispute resolution rather than punishment. The act of
process and the administration of civil law are governed by the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (CPC). Civil law can be further classified into Law of Contract, Family Law, Property Law,
and Law of Tort.

Some examples of civil offences are breach of contract, non-delivery of goods, non-payment
of dues to lender or seller defamation, breach of contract, and disputes between landlord
and tenant.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.6  BUSINESS LAWS

Common Law

A judicial precedent or a case law is common law. A judgment delivered by the Supreme
Court will be binding upon the courts within the territory of India under Article 141 of the
Indian Constitution. The doctrine of Stare Decisis is the principle supporting common law. It
is a Latin phrase that means "to stand by that which is decided." The doctrine of Stare
Decisis reinforces the obligation of courts to follow the same principle or judgement
established by previous decisions while ruling a case where the facts are similar or "on all
four legs" with the earlier decision.

Principles of Natural Justice

Natural justice, often known as Jus Natural deals with certain fundamental principles of
justice going beyond written law. Nemo judex in causa sua (Literally meaning "No one
should be made a judge in his own cause, and it's a Rule against Prejudice), audi alteram
partem (Literally meaning "hear the other party or give the other party a fair hearing), and
reasoned decision are the rules of Natural Justice. A judgement can override or alter a
common law, but it cannot override or change the statute.

    5. ENFORCING THE LAW

After a law is passed in parliament it has to be enforced. Somebody should monitor whether
the law is being followed. This is the job of the executive. Depending on whether a law is a
Central law or a State law the Central or State Government will be the enforcing authority.
For this purpose government functions are distributed to various ministries. Some of the
popular Ministries are the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the Ministry
of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Law and Justice and so on. These Ministries are headed by a
minister and run by officers of the Indian administrative and other services.

The Government of India exercises its executive authority through a number of Government
Ministries or Departments of State. A Ministry is composed of employed officials, known as
civil servants, and is politically accountable through a minister. Most major Ministries are
headed by a Cabinet Minister, who sits in the Union Council of Ministers, and is typically
supported by a team of junior ministers called the Ministers of State.

For example, the Income Tax Act is implemented and enforced by the Ministry of Finance
through the Central Board for Direct Taxes coming under the Department of Revenue and is
administered by the officers of the Indian Revenue Service. We will see some of the major
Ministries and the laws which are enforced by them:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                        1.7

(1) The Ministry of Finance

The Ministry of Finance (Vitta Mantralaya) is a Ministry within the Government of India
concerned with the economy of India, serving as the Treasury of India. In particular, it
concerns itself with taxation, financial legislation, financial institutions, capital markets,
centre and state finances, and the Union Budget. As a Chartered Accountant, many of your
day-to-day work life will be impacted by this ministry and its proclamations. This Ministry is
so important that many ministers have preferred to hold the portfolio of Finance Minister
also. One of the important functions of the Finance Ministry is the presentation of the Union
Budget. This annual event is eagerly awaited by professionals and the common man as it
provides for the rates of taxes and budget allocations for the ensuing year.

Constitution of the Ministry of Finance-

  Ministry of Finance

      · is the apex controlling authority
      · of four Central Civil Services, namely:

            · Indian Revenue Service
            · Indian Audit and Accounts Service
            · Indian Economic Service and
            · Indian Civil Accounts Service.
      · Also the apex controlling authority of one of the central commerce
            servicesnamely Indian Cost and Management Accounts Service.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.8          BUSINESS LAWS

Departments under the Ministry of Finance-

                                    Departments of Ministry of Finance

Department   Department
of Economic         of

    Affairs  Expenditure

                          Department               Department    Department
                          of Revenue               of Financial         of

                                                     Services     Investment  Department
                                                                  and Public    of Public

                                                                      Asset   Enterprises
                                                                 Management

(i) Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA)

Ministry of Corporate Affairs

                    · is an Indian Government Ministry.
                    · primarily concerned with administration of the Companies Act

                       2013, the Companies Act 1956, the Limited Liability Partnership
                       Act, 2008, and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
                    · responsible mainly for the regulation of Indian enterprises in the
                       industrial and services sector.
                    · The Ministry is mostly run by civil servants of the ICLS cadre.
                    · These officers are elected through the Civil Services
                       Examination conducted by Union Public Service Commission.
                    · The highest post, Director General of Corporate Affairs (DGCoA),
                       is fixed at Apex Scale for the ICLS.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             INDIAN REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                               1.9

Ministry of Home Affairs (Gha Mantralaya)

                · is a ministry of the Government of India.
                · As an interior ministry of India, it is mainly responsible for the

                  maintenance of internal security and domestic policy.
                · The Home Ministry is headed by Union Minister of Home

                  Affairs.

               Departments of Ministry of Home Affairs

Department   Department of                           Department         of  Department
  of Border      Internal                                                   of States
                 Security                            Official Language
Management

                                                   Department of Home

                     Department of Jammu, Kashmir and

                                 Ladakh Affairs

             Department of Official Language

Central Translation          Central Hindi Training  Directorate of Census
        Bureau                        Institute             Operations

Ministry of Law and Justice

Ministry of Law and Justice

             ·in the Government of India is a Cabinet Ministry

             ·deals with the

             · management of the legal affairs, through the Department of Legal
              Affairs

             · legislative activities through the Legislative Department

             · administration of justice in India through the Department of Justice

             ·The Department of Legal Affairs is concerned with advising the various
              Ministries of the Central Government while the Legislative Department is
              concerned with drafting of principal legislation for the Central Government.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.10  BUSINESS LAWS

      Departments of Ministry of Law and Justice

Department of Legal                                 Legislative  Department of
         Affairs                                   Department         Justice

(ii) The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)

  The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)

                         ·is the regulatory body
                         · for securities and commodity market in India
                         · under the ownership of Ministry of Finance within the Government of India.
                         · It was established on 12 April, 1988 as an executive body and was given
                           statutory powers on 30 January, 1992 through the SEBI Act, 1992.

(iii) Reserve Bank of India (RBI)

            Reserve Bank of India-

                                 ·is India's Central Bank and regulatory body responsible for
                                   regulation of the Indian banking system.
                                 ·It is under the ownership of Ministry of Finance, Government of
                                   India.
                                 · It is responsible for the control, issue and maintaining supply of the
                                   Indian rupee.
                                 · It also manages the country's main payment systems and works to
                                   promote its economic development.
                                 · Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran (BRBNM) is a specialised
                                   division of RBI through which it prints and mints Indian currency
                                   notes (INR) in two of its currency printing presses located in Nashik
                                   (Western India) and Dewas (Central India).
                                 ·RBI established the National Payments Corporation of India as one
                                   of its specialised division to regulate the payment and settlement
                                   systems in India.
                                 ·Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation was
                                   established by RBI as one of its specialised division for the purpose
                                   of providing insurance of deposits and guaranteeing of credit
                                   facilities to all Indian banks.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  INDIAN REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                              1.11

(iv) Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI)-

  Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI)-

                        ·is the regulator for overseeing insolvency proceedings and entities
                         like Insolvency Professional Agencies (IPA), Insolvency Professionals
                         (IP) and Information Utilities (IU) in India.
                        ·It was established on 1 October 2016 and given statutory powers
                         through the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, which was passed
                         by Lok Sabha on 5th May 2016.
                        ·It covers Individuals, Companies, Limited Liability,
                         Partnerships and Partnership firms. The new code will speed up the
                         resolution process for stressed assets in the country.
                        ·It attempts to simplify the process of insolvency and bankruptcy
                         proceedings.
                        ·It handles the cases using two tribunals like NCLT (National
                         company law tribunal) and Debt recovery tribunal.

  6. STRUCTURE OF THE INDIAN JUDICIAL SYSTEM

When there is a dispute between citizens or between citizens and the Government, these
disputes are resolved by the judiciary.

The functions of judiciary system of India are:

  Regulation of the interpretation of the Acts and Codes,

  Dispute Resolution,

  Promotion of fairness among the citizens of the land.

In the hierarchy of courts, the Supreme Court is at the top, followed by the High Courts
and District Courts. Decisions of a High Court are binding in the respective state but are only
persuasive in other states. Decisions of the Supreme Court are binding on all High Courts
under Article 141 of the Indian Constitution. In fact, a Supreme Court decision is the final
word on the matter.

(i) Supreme Court

The Supreme Court is the apex body of the judiciary. It was established on 26th January,
1950. The Chief Justice of India is the highest authority appointed under Article 126. The
principal bench of the Supreme Court consists of seven members including the Chief Justice
of India. Presently, the number has increased to 34 including the Chief Justice of India due

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.12  BUSINESS LAWS

to the rise in the number of cases and workload. An individual can seek relief in the
Supreme Court by filing a writ petition under Article 32.

(ii) High Court

The highest court of appeal in each state and union territory is the High Court. Article 214 of
the Indian Constitution states that there must be a High Court in each state. The High Court
has appellant, original jurisdiction, and Supervisory jurisdiction. However, Article 227 of the
Indian Constitution limits a High Court's supervisory power. In India, there are twenty-five
High Courts, one for each state and union territory, and one for each state and union
territory. Six states share a single High Court. An individual can seek remedies against
violation of fundamental rights in High Court by filing a writ under Article 226.

Which is the oldest High Court in India?

The oldest high court in the country is the Calcutta High Court, established on 2nd July,
1862.

(iii) District Court

Below the High Courts are the District Courts. The Courts of District Judge deal with Civil law
matters i.e. contractual disputes and claims for damages etc., The Courts of Sessions deals
with Criminal matters.

Under pecuniary jurisdiction, a civil judge can try suits valuing not more than Rupees two
crore.

Jurisdiction means the power to control. Courts get territorial Jurisdiction based on the
areas covered by them. Cases are decided based on the local limits within which the parties
reside or the property under dispute is situated.

(iv) Metropolitan courts

Metropolitan courts are established in metropolitan cities in consultation with the High
Court where the population is ten lakh or more. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate has powers
as Chief Judicial Magistrate and Metropolitan Magistrate has powers as the Court of a
Magistrate of the first class.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                        1.13

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. A Chartered Accountant should be aware of law because
         (a) He has to be an expert in law
         (b) He has to argue in High court and Supreme court
         (c) He has to advice management and clients on legal matters at a basic or
                   threshold level.
         (d) None of the above.

2. Which of the following is not a MAIN source of law in India?
         (a) Legal text books
         (b) The Parliament
         (c) State Assemblies
         (d) The Constitution

3. In India we follow the federal system of Government. This means that
         (a) All the power is with the President of India
         (b) Powers are distributed between Centre and States
         (c) All the power is with the Centre
         (d) There are no restrictions on the power of States.

4. The Constitution of India was adopted in
         (a) 1947
         (b) 1949
         (c) 1950
         (d) 1951

5. The law concerned with violation of the rule of law and punishment of the same is
         called -
         (a) Family law
         (b) Criminal law

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.14  BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) Civil law
         (d) Property law
6. Which of the following is NOT an example of Civil law?
         (a) Breach of contract
         (b) Non-delivery of goods
         (c) Traffic offenses
         (d) Non-payment of dues
7. When a law is proposed in Parliament it is called
         (a) Act
         (b) Statute
         (c) Bill
         (d) Notification
8. Which of the following is NOT a department of the Ministry of Finance?
         (a) Department of Economic Affairs
         (b) Department of Expenditure
         (c) Department of States
         (d) Department of Revenue
9. Courts get territorial limits based on
         (a) The local limits within which the party resides
         (b) The local limits within which the property under dispute is located
         (c) either a or b
         (d) None of the above

Descriptive Questions

1. What is the significance of the Supreme Court and High Court in the Indian judiciary?
2. What do you understand by Law? Also, elaborate the procedure for making a Law.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         INDIAN REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                            1.15

ANSWER/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.  (c)  2   (a)  3                                (b) 4.  (c)  5. (b)  6.  (c)

7.  (c)  8.  (c)  9.                               (c)

Answers to the Descriptive Questions

1. (i) Supreme Court

                   The Supreme Court is the apex body of the judiciary. It was established on
                   26th January 1950. The Chief Justice of India is the highest authority
                   appointed under Article 126. The principal bench of the Supreme Court
                   consists of seven members including the Chief Justice of India. Presently, the
                   number has increased to 34 including the Chief Justice of India due to the rise
                   in the number of cases and workload. An individual can seek relief in the
                   Supreme Court by filing a writ petition under Article 32.

         (ii) High Court

                   The highest court of appeal in each state and union territory is the High
                   Court. Article 214 of the Indian Constitution states that there must be a High
                   Court in each state. The High Court has appellant, original jurisdiction, and
                   Supervisory jurisdiction. However, Article 227 of the Indian Constitution limits
                   a High Court's supervisory power. In India, there are twenty-five High Courts,
                   one for each state and union territory, and one for each state and union
                   territory. Six states share a single High Court. An individual can seek remedies
                   against violation of fundamental rights in High Court by filing a writ under
                   Article 226.

2. Meaning of Law: Law is a set of obligations and duties imposed by the government
         for securing welfare and providing justice to society. India's legal framework reflects
         the social, political, economic, and cultural aspects of our vast and diversified
         country.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   1.16  BUSINESS LAWS

The Process of Making a Law

·  When a law is proposed in parliament it is called a Bill.

·  After discussion and debate, the law is passed in Lok Sabha.

·  Thereafter, it has to be passed in Rajya Sabha.

·  It then has to obtain the assent of the President of India.

·  Finally, the law will be notified by the Government in the publication called

   the Official Gazette of India.

·  The law will become applicable from the date mentioned in the notification as

   the effective date.

·  Once it is notified and effective, it is called an Act of Parliament.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
