        THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                          2.203

               UNIT­9: AGENCY

                                          LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to understand:

 The relationship between agent and principal and the intention behind
      adoption of such course of agency.

 Rights and obligations of an agent as well as the circumstances under
      which the agent is personally liable for the acts done by him on behalf
      of the principal and the legal position of the agent, the principal and
      the third parties involved.

 Terms `sub-agent' and `substituted agent' and to distinguish between
      the two.

UNIT OVERVIEW

                                                    Meaning           Appointment
                                                   Sub agents           Authority

Agency                 Ratification
               Revocation of Authority

               Duties, Obligations and Rights of Agent

        Effect of agency on contract with third persons

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.204  BUSINESS LAWS

A relationship of agency is established when one party (agent) is authorized by another
party (principal) to act on his/ her behalf. Such relationships are initiated when one party
desires to extend his/her activities beyond his/her present limits or capacity. In modern life,
it would be impossible for a man to do everything by himself. Thus, he needs agents, to
perform activities. A relationship of agency is commonly visible in all business transactions.
These include hiring employees or retaining the services of other professionals such as an
attorney, design professional, software developer etc. An agent has the potential to form
contracts on behalf of the principal and in doing so, will bind the principal. As a result, the
relationship of agency is one of trust and confidence and an agent must perform his/her
activities in a capable and conscientious manner. The law of agency is contained in sections
182 to 238 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.

    9.1 WHAT IS AGENCY?

The Indian Contract Act, 1872 does not define the word `Agency'.
However, section 182 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 defines Agent
and Principal as:

Agent means a person employed to do any act for another or to
represent another in dealing with the third persons and

The principal means a person for whom such act is done or who is so represented.

Test of Agency

(a) Whether the person has the capacity to bind the principal and make him answerable
         to the third party.

(b) Whether he can establish privity of contract between the principal and third parties.

If the answer to these questions is in affirmative (Yes), then there is a relationship of agency.

Thus, `Agency' is a comprehensive word used to describe the relationship between one
person and another, where the first mentioned person brings the second mentioned person
into legal relation with others.

The Rule of Agency is based on the maxim "Qui facit
per alium, facit per se" i.e., he who acts through an
agent is himself acting.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                  2.205

    9.2 APPOINTMENT AND AUTHORITY OF AGENTS

Who may employ an agent: According to Section 183, "any person who has attained
majority according to the law to which he is subject, and who is of sound mind, may employ
an agent." Thus, a minor or a person of unsound mind cannot appoint an agent.

     Person qualified to · major
  appoint agent must be · sound mind

Who may be an agent:

According to Section 184 of the Act any person may become an agent i.e. even a minor or a
person of unsound mind may become an agent and the principal shall be bound by his acts.
But as a rule of caution, a minor or a person of unsound mind should not be appointed as
an agent because he is incompetent to contract and in case of his misconduct or negligence,
the principal shall not be able to proceed against him.

Example 1: P appoints Q, a minor, to sell his car for not less than ` 2,50,000. Q sells it for
` 2,00,000. P will be held bound by the transaction and further shall have no right against Q
for claiming the compensation for having not obeyed the instructions, since Q is a minor
and a contract with a minor is `void-ab-initio'.

Consideration not necessary: According to Section 185, no consideration is necessary to
create an agency. The acceptance of the office of an agent is regarded as a sufficient
consideration for the appointment.

    9.3 CREATION OF AGENCY

In the words of Desai J, of the Supreme Court of India "The relation of agency arises whenever
one person called the agent has the authority to act on behalf of another called the principal
and consents to act. The relationship has genesis in a contract".

The relationship of the principal and the agent may be created in any of the following ways --

The authority may be express or implied: According to Section 186, the authority of an
agent may be express or implied.

1.  Definitions of express and implied authority [Section 187]

    Express Authority: An authority is said to be express when it is given by words,
    spoken or written.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           2.206  BUSINESS LAWS

    Example 2: A is residing in Delhi and he has a house in Kolkata. A authorizes B under
    a power of attorney, as caretaker of his house. Agency is created by express
    agreement.

    Example 3: If a customer of a bank wishes to transact his banking business through
    an agent, the bank will require written evidence of the appointment of the agent and
    will normally ask to see the registered power of attorney appointing the agent.

2.  Implied Authority: An authority is said to be implied when it is to be inferred from

    the circumstances of the case, conduct of the parties and things spoken or written, or

    in the ordinary course of dealing, may be accounted from the circumstances of the

    case.

    If a person realises rent and gives it to the landlord, he impliedly acts for the landlord
    as an agent.

    Example 5: A owns a shop in Selampur, living himself in Kolkata and visiting the
    shop occasionally. The shop is managed by B, and he is in the habit of ordering
    goods from C in the name of A for the purposes of the shop, and of paying for them
    out of A's funds with A's knowledge. B has an implied authority from A to order
    goods from C in the name of A for the purposes of the shop.

Implied Agency includes:-

a.  Agency by Estoppel [Section 237]: Where the principal by his conduct or

    statement willfully induces another person to believe that a certain person is his

    agent, he is subsequently prevented or estopped from denying the fact of agency.

    According to section 237 of the Contract Act, an agency by estoppel may be created
    when following essentials are fulfilled:

    1.     the principal must have made a representation;

    2.     the representation may be express or implied;

    3.     The representation must state that the agent has an authority to do certain

           act although really he has no authority;

    4.     The principal must have induced the third person by such representation; and

    5.     The third person must have believed the representation and made the

           contract on the belief of such representation.

    Example 6: A consigns goods to B for sale and gives him instructions not to sell
    below a fixed price. C being ignorant of B's instruction enters into a contract with B
    to buy the goods at a price lower than the reserved price. A is bound by the contract.
    A cannot plead that he had given instructions to B to not sell the goods below
    certain price. An agency by estoppel is, consequently, deemed between A and B.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872           2.207

    Example 7: If Piyal (the principal) has for several months permitted Sunil to buy
    goods on credit from Prasad and has paid for the goods bought by Sunil, Piyal
    cannot later refuse to pay Prasad who had supplied goods on credit to Sunil in the
    belief that he was Piyal's agent and was buying the goods on behalf of Piyal. Piyal is
    estopped from now asserting that Sunil is not his agent because on earlier occasions
    he permitted Prasad to believe that Sunil was his agent and Prasad had acted in that
    belief.

b. Agency by Necessity: An agency of necessity arises due to some emergent
         circumstances. In emergency a person is authorised to do what he cannot do in
         ordinary circumstances. Thus, where an agent is authorised to do certain act, and
         while doing such an act, an emergency arises, he acquires an extra-ordinary or
         special authority to prevent his principal from loss.

    Example 8: Raja has a large farm on which Shyam is the caretaker. When Raja is in
    Canada, there is a huge fire on the farm. Shyam becomes an agent of necessity for
    Raja so as to save the property from being destroyed by fire. Raja (the principal) will
    be liable for any expenses, Shyam (his agent of necessity) incurred to put out the fire
    and save the farm from destruction during Raja's absence from the country.

3.  Agency by Operation of Law: When law treats one person as an agent of other. For

    example, a partner is the agent of the firm for the purposes of the business of the

    firm.

4.  Rights of person as to acts done for him without his authority, Effect of

    ratification [Section 196]: Where acts are done by one person on behalf of another,

    but without his knowledge or authority, he may elect to ratify or to disown such acts.

    If he ratifies them, the same effects will follow as if they had been performed by his

    authority. In simple words, "Ratification" means approving a previous act or

    transaction. Ratification may be express or implied by the conduct of the person on

    whose behalf the act was done.

    Example 9: X who is Y's agent has on 10th January 2022 purchases goods from Z on
    credit without Y's permission. After the purchase, on 20th January 2022, Y tells X that

    he will accept responsibility to pay for the purchases although at the time of

    purchase the agent had no authority to buy on credit. Y's subsequent statement on
    20th January 2022 amounts to a ratification of the agent's (X's) purchase of goods on
    10th January 2022.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.208         BUSINESS LAWS

Essentials of a valid Ratification

a. Ratification may be expressed or Implied [Section 197]: Ratification may
         be expressed or may be implied in the conduct of the person on whose behalf
         the acts are done.

    Example 10: A, without authority, buys goods for B. Afterwards B sells them
    to C on his own account; B's conduct implies a ratification of the purchase
    made for him by A.

    Example 11: A, without B's authority, lends B's money to C. Afterwards B
    accepts interests on the money from C. B's conduct implies a ratification of
    the loan.

b. Knowledge requisite for valid ratification [Section 198]: No valid
         ratification can be made by a person whose knowledge of the facts of the
         case is materially defective.

    Example 12: A has an authority from P to buy certain goods at the market
    rate. He buys at a higher rate but P accepts the purchase. Afterwards P comes
    to know that the goods purchased by A for P belonged to A himself. The
    ratification is not binding on P.

c.  The whole transaction must be ratified [Section 199]: There can be

    ratification of an act in entirely or its rejection in entirely. The principal cannot

    ratify a part of the transaction which is beneficial to him and reject the rest.

d. Ratification cannot injure third person [Section 200]: When the interest of
         third parties is affected, the principle of ratification does not apply.
         Ratification cannot relate back to the date of contract if third party has in the
         intervening time acquired rights.

    Example 13: A, not being authorized thereto by B, demands on behalf of B,
    the delivery of a chattel, the property of B, from C, who is in possession of it.
    This demand cannot be ratified by B, so as to make C liable for damages for
    his refusal to deliver.

    Example 14: A holds a lease from B, terminable on three months' notice. C, an
    unauthorized person, gives notice of termination to A. The notice cannot be
    ratified by B, so as to be binding on A.

e. Ratification within reasonable time: Ratification must be made within a
         reasonable period of time.

f.  Communication of Ratification: Ratification must be communicated to the

    other party.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.209

g. Act to be ratified must be valid: Act to be ratified should not be void or
         illegal, for e.g. payment of dividend out of capital, forgery of signatures, any
         other criminal offence, or anything which is not permitted under law.

    9.4 EXTENT OF AGENT'S AUTHORITY

The agent's authority is governed by two principles, namely (a) in normal circumstances and
(b) in emergency.

(a) Agent's authority in normal circumstances [Section 188]: An agent having an
         authority to do an act has authority to do every lawful thing which is necessary in
         order to do such act.

         An agent having an authority to carry on a business has authority to do every lawful
         thing necessary for the purpose, or usually done in the course, of conducting such
         business.

         Example 15: A is employed by B, residing in London, to recover at Mumbai a debt
         due to B. A may adopt any legal process necessary for the purpose of recovering the
         debt and may give a valid discharge for the same.

         Example 16: A constitutes B as his agent to carry on his business of a shipbuilder. B
         may purchase timber and other materials, and hire workmen, for the purposes of
         carrying on the business.

(b) Agent's authority in an emergency [Section 189]: An agent has authority, in an
         emergency, to do all such acts for the purpose of protecting his principal from loss as
         would be done by a person of ordinary prudence, in his own case, under similar
         circumstances.

         To constitute a valid agency in an emergency, following conditions must be satisfied.

         (i) Agent should not be a in a position or have any opportunity to communicate
                   with his principal within the time available.

         (ii) There should have been actual and definite commercial necessity for the
                   agent to act promptly.

         (iii) the agent should have acted bonafide and for the benefit of the principal.

         (iv) the agent should have adopted the most reasonable and practicable course
                   under the circumstances, and

         (v) the agent must have been in possession of the goods belonging to his
                   principal and which are the subject of contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.210  BUSINESS LAWS

Example 17: An agent who has authority for sale of goods may repair it if necessary.

Example 18: A consigns perishable goods to B at Srinagar, with directions to send them
immediately to C at Tamandu. B may sell the good if they begin to perish before reaching its
destination.

    9.5 SUB-AGENTS

When agent cannot delegate [Section 190]: An agent cannot lawfully employ another to
perform acts which he has expressly or impliedly undertaken to perform personally, unless
by the ordinary custom of trade a sub-agent may, or from the nature of the agency, a sub-
agent must, be employed.

"Sub-agent" defined [Section 191]: A "Sub-agent" is a person employed by, and acting
under the control of, the original agent in the business of the agency.

Analysis: Sub agency refers to case where an agent
appoints another agent. The appointment of sub agent is
not lawful, because the agent is a delegatee and a
delegatee cannot further delegate. This is based on the
Latin principle "delegatus non potest delegare".

       PRINCIPAL                                   ·delegates
                                                    act/ work

                                                   AGENT       ·further
                                                                delegates

                                                                SUB-
                                                               AGENT

A contract of agency is of a fiduciary character. It is based on the confidence reposed by the
principal in the agent and that is why a delegatee cannot further delegate.

Exception where an agent can appoint Sub-agent:
(1) The appointment of a sub agent would be valid if the terms of appointment originally

         contemplated it.
(2) Sometimes customs of the trade may provide for appointment of sub agents.

         In both these cases the sub agent would be treated as the agent of the principal.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.211

(3) Where in the course of the agent's employment, unforeseen emergency arise
         making it necessary for him to delegate the authority that was given to him by the
         principal.

Representation of principal by sub-agent properly appointed [Section 192]: Where a
sub-agent is properly appointed,

(1) Principal is liable to third parties for the acts of the sub-agent.

(2) Agents responsibility for sub agents: The agent is responsible to the principal for
         the acts of the sub-agent.

(3) Sub-agents liability to principal: The sub-agent is responsible for his acts to the
         agent, but not to the principal, except in case of fraud or willful wrong.

Agent's responsibility for sub-agent appointed without authority [Section 193]: Where
an agent, without having authority to do so, has appointed a person to act as a sub-agent,

(1) the agent is responsible for his acts both to the principal and to third persons;

(2) the principal is not responsible for the acts of the sub agent,

(3) the sub agent is not responsible to the principal at all. He is answerable only to the
         agent.

         Example 19: A, a carrier, agreed to carry 60 bags of cotton waste from Morvi to
         Bhavnagar by a truck. A asked B, another carrier, to carry the goods. The goods were
         damaged in transit. Held, A was liable even though it was proved that B was the
         carrier.

    9.6 SUBSTITUTED AGENT

Substituted Agent is a person appointed by the agent to act for the principal, in the business
of agency, with the knowledge and consent of the principal. Substituted agents are not sub
agents. They are agents of the principal.

Relation between principal and person duly appointed by agent to act in business of
agency [Section 194]: Where an agent, holding an express or implied authority to name
another person to act for the principal in the business of the agency, has named another
person accordingly, such person is not a sub-agent, but an agent of the principal for such
part of the business of the agency as is entrusted to him.

Example 20: A directs B, his solicitor, to sell his estate by auction, and to employ an
auctioneer for the purpose. B names C, an auctioneer, to conduct the sale. C is not a sub-
agent, but is A's agent for the conduct of the sale.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.212           BUSINESS LAWS

Example 21: A authorizes B, a merchant in Kolkata, to recover the moneys due to A from C
& Co. B instructs D, a solicitor, to take legal proceedings against C & Co. for the recovery of
the money. D is not a sub-agent, but is a solicitor for A.

Agent's duty in naming such person [Section 195]: In selecting such agent for his
principal, an agent is bound to exercise the same amount of discretion as a man of ordinary
prudence would exercise in his own case; and, if he does this, he is not responsible to the
principal for the acts or negligence of the agent so selected.

Example 22: A instructs B, a merchant, to buy a ship for him. B employs a ship surveyor of
good reputation to choose a ship for A. The surveyor makes the choice negligently and the
ship turns out to be unseaworthy and is lost. B is not, but the surveyor is, responsible to A.

Example 23: A consigns goods to B, a merchant, for sale. B in due course, employs an
auctioneer in good credit to sell the goods of A, and allows the auctioneer to receive the
proceeds of the sale. The auctioneer afterwards becomes insolvent without having
accounted for the proceeds. B is not responsible to A for the proceeds.

9.7 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A SUB-AGENT AND A
         SUBSTITUTED AGENT

Both a sub-agent and a substituted agent are appointed by the agent. But, however, the
following are the points of distinction between the two.

S.no Sub Agent                                     Substituted Agent

1. A sub-agent does his work under the A substituted agent works under the

control and directions of agent.                   instructions of the principal.

2. The agent not only appoints a sub- The agent does not delegate any part of his
         agent but also delegates to him a task to a substituted agent.
         part of his own duties.

3. There is no privity of contract Privity of contract is established between a
         between the principal and the sub- principal and a substituted agent.
         agent.

4. The sub-agent is responsible to the A substituted agent is responsible to the

agent alone and is not generally principal and not to the original agent who

responsible to the principal.                      appointed him

5. The agent is responsible to the The agent is not responsible to the principal
         principal for the acts of the sub- for the acts of the substituted agent.
         agent.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.213

6. The sub-agent has no right of action The substituted agent can sue the principal
         against the principal for for remuneration due to him.
         remuneration due to him.

7. Sub-agents may be improperly Substituted agents can never be improperly

appointed.                                         appointed.

8. The agent remains liable for the acts The agent's duty ends once he has named
         of the sub-agent as long as the sub- the substituted agent.
         agency continues.

    9.8 DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF AN AGENT

(i) Duty to follow instructions or customs: According to Section 211 an agent is bound
         to conduct the business of his principal according to the direction given by the
         principal, or, in the absence of any such directions, according to the customs which
         prevails in doing business of the same kind at the place where the agent conducts
         such business. When the agent acts otherwise and any loss is sustained by the
         Principal, he must indemnify him, and, if any profit accrues, he must account for it.

         Example 24: A, an agent is engaged for managing the business of B, in which it is a
         custom to invest money at hand for interest. If A omits to make such investment he
         must indemnify B for the losses i.e. for the interest B would have obtained for such
         investment.

         Example 25: B, a broker, in whose business it is not the custom to sell on credit, sells
         goods of A on credit to C. C, before payment, becomes insolvent. B will have to
         indemnify A for the losses.

(ii) Duty of reasonable care and skill: According to section 212, an agent is bound to
         conduct the business of the principal with as much skill as is generally possessed by
         persons engaged in similar business, unless the principal has notice of his want of
         skill.

         The agent is always bound to act with reasonable diligence, and to use such skill as
         he possesses; and to make compensation to his principal in respect of the direct
         consequences of his own neglect, want of skill or misconduct, but not in respect of
         loss of damage which are indirectly or remotely caused by such neglect, want of skill
         or misconduct.

         Example 26: A, a merchant in Kolkata, has an agent, B, in London, to whom a sum of
         money is paid on A's account, with orders to remit. B retains the money for a
         considerable time. A, in consequence of not receiving the money, becomes insolvent.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.214  BUSINESS LAWS

         B is liable for the money and interest from the day on which it ought to have been
         paid, according to the usual rate, and for any further direct loss- e.g. by variation of
         rate of exchange-but not further.

         Example 27: A, an agent for the sale of goods, having authority to sell on credit, sells
         to B on credit, without making the proper and usual enquiries as to the solvency of B.
         B, at the time of such sale is insolvent. A must compensate his principal for the loss
         sustained by him.

         Example 28: A, an insurance-broker, employed by B to effect an insurance on a ship,
         omits to see that the "usual clauses" are inserted in the policy. The ship is afterwards
         lost. In consequence of the omission nothing can be recovered from the
         underwriters. A is bound to make good the loss to B.

         Example 29: A, a merchant in England, directs B, his agent at Mumbai, who accepts
         the agency, to send him 100 bales of cotton by a certain ship. B, having it in his
         power to send the cotton, omits to do so. The ship arrives safely in England. Soon
         after her arrival the price of cotton rises. B is bound to make good to A the profit
         which he might have made by the 100 bales of cotton at the time the ship arrived,
         but not any profit he might have made by the subsequent rise.

(iii) Duty to render proper accounts [Section 213]: An agent is bound to render proper
         accounts to his principal on demand. Rendering accounts does not mean showing
         the accounts but the accounts supported by vouchers. (Anandprasad vs. Dwarkanath)

(iv) Agent's duty to communicate with principal [Section 214]: It is the duty of an
         agent, in cases of difficulty, to use all reasonable diligence in communicating with his
         principal, and in seeking to obtain his instructions.

(v) Duty not to deal on his own account: Agent should not deal on his own account
         without first obtaining the consent of the principal, otherwise the principal may--

         (a) repudiate the transaction, (Section 215)

         (b) claim from the agent any benefit which may have resulted to him from the
         transaction. (Section 216)

         Example 30: A directs B to sell A's estate. B buys the estate for himself in the name
         of C. A, on discovering that B has bought the estate for himself, may repudiate the
         sale if he can show that B has dishonestly concealed any material fact, or that the
         sale has been disadvantageous to him.

         Example 31: A directs B to sell A's estate. B, on looking over the estate before selling
         it, finds a mine on the estate which is unknown to A. B informs A that he wishes to
         buy the estate for himself, but conceals the discovery of the mine. A allow B to buy,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                                            2.215

        in ignorance of the existence of the mine. A, on discovering that B knew of the mine
        at the time he bought the estate, may either repudiate or accept the sale at his
        option.

        Example 32: A directs B, his agent, to buy a certain house for him. B tells A it cannot be
        bought and buys the house for himself. A may, on discovering that B has bought the
        house, compel him to sell it to A at the price he gave for it.

(vi) Duty not to make secret profits: It is the duty of an agent not to make any secret profit
         in the business of agency. His relationship with the principal is of fiduciary nature and
         this requires absolute good faith in the conduct of agency.

        Secret Profit means any advantage obtained by the agent over and above his
        agreed remuneration and which he would not have been able to make but for his
        position as agent.

(vii) Duty not to delegate: According to section 190, an agent cannot lawfully employ to
         perform acts which he has expressly or impliedly undertaken to perform personally,
         unless by the ordinary custom of trade a sub-agent may, or, from the nature of
         agency, a sub- agent, must be employed.

(viii)  Agent's duty to pay sums received for principal [Section 218]: Subject to such
        deductions, the agent is bound to pay to his principal all sums received on his
        account.

(ix) Duty not to use any confidential information received in the course of agency
         against the principal.

        9.9 RIGHTS OF AN AGENT

                           Right to retain out of
                             sums received on
                            principal's account

              Right of                                              Right to
         indemnification                                         remuneration
        against acts done
                                                   Rights of an
           in good faith                               Agent

             Right of                                             Agent's lien
        indemnification                                          on principal's
         for lawful acts
                                                                    property

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.216  BUSINESS LAWS

(i) Right of retain out of sums received on principal's account [Section 217]: This
         section empowers the agent to retain, out of any sums received on account of the
         principal in the business of the agency for the following payments:

(a) all moneys due to himself in respect of advances made

(b) in respect of expenses properly incurred by him in conducting such business

(c) such remuneration as may be payable to him for acting as agent.

The right can be exercised on any sums received on account of the principal in the
business of agency.

(ii) Right to remuneration [Section 219]: The agent in the normal course is entitled for
         remuneration as per the contract. In the absence of any agreed amount of
         remuneration, he is entitled for usual remuneration which is customary in the
         business. However, an agent who is guilty of misconduct in the business of the
         agency is not entitled to any remuneration in respect of that part of the business
         which he has misconducted [Section 220].

Example 33: A employs B to recover `1,00,000 from C, and invest it in securities that
give good returns. B recovers the amount and lays out ` 90,000 on good securities
but lays out ` 10,000 on securities which he ought to provide poor returns, whereby
A loses ` 2,000. B is entitled to remuneration for recovering the ` 1,00,000 and for
investing the ` 90,000. He is not entitled to any remuneration for investing the
` 10,000, and he must indemnify A for ` 2000.

Example 34: A employs B to recover ` 1,00,000 from C. Because of B's misconduct
the money is not recovered. B is entitled to no remuneration for his services and
must make good the loss.

(iii) Agent's lien on principal's property [Section 221]: In the absence of any contract
         to the contrary, an agent is entitled to retain the goods, papers and other property,
         whether movable or immovable, of the principal received by him, until the amount
         due to himself for commission, disbursement and services in respect of the same has
         been paid or accounted for him.

The conditions of this right are:

a.  The agent should be lawfully entitled to receive from the principal a sum of

    money by way of commission earned or disbursement made or services

    rendered in the proper execution of the business of agency.

b. The property over which the lien is to be exercised should belong to the
         principal and it should have been received by the agent in his capacity and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                          2.217

    during the course of his ordinary duties as an agent. If the agent obtains
    possession of the property by unlawful means, he cannot exercise particular
    lien.

The agent's right to lien is lost in the following cases:

(a) When the possession of the property is lost.

(b) When the agent waives his right. Waiver may arise out of agreement express
         or implied.

(c) The agent's lien is subject to a contract to the contrary.

(iv) Right to indemnity:

a. Right of indemnification for lawful acts [Section 222]: The principal is
         bound to indemnify the agent against all consequences of lawful acts done in
         exercise of his authority.

    Example 35: `A' residing in Delhi appoints `B' from Mumbai as an agent to sell
    his merchandise. As a result `B' contracts to deliver the merchandise to various
    parties. But A fails to send the merchandise to B and B faces litigations for
    non- performance. Here, A is bound to protect B against the litigations and all
    costs, expenses arising of that.

b. Right of indemnification against acts done in good faith [Section 223]:
         Where the agent acts in good faith on the instruction of principal, agent is
         entitled for indemnification of any loss or damage from the principal.

    Example 36: Where P appoints A as his agent and directs him to sell certain
    goods which in fact turned out to be not those belonging to P and if third
    parties sue A for this act, A is entitled for reimbursement and indemnification
    for such act done in good faith.

    However, the agent cannot claim any reimbursement or indemnification for
    any loss etc. arising out of acts done by him in violation of any penal laws of
    the country.

c.  Non-liability of employer of agent to do a criminal act: According to

    section 224, where one person employs another to do an act which is criminal,

    the employer is not liable to the agent, either upon an express or an implied

    promise, to indemnify him against the consequences of that act.

    Example 37: A employs B to beat C and agrees to indemnify him against all
    consequences of the act. B thereupon beats C and has to pay damages to C for so
    doing. A is not liable to indemnify B for those damages.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.218  BUSINESS LAWS

                   Example 38: B, the proprietor of a newspaper, publishes, at A's request, a
                   libel upon C in the paper, and A agrees to indemnify B against the
                   consequences of the publication, and all costs and damages of any action in
                   respect thereof. B is sued by C and has to pay damages, and also incurs
                   expenses. A is not liable to indemnify B.

(v) Right to compensation for injury caused by principal's neglect [Section 225]:
         Section 225 provides that the principal must compensate his agent in respect of
         injury caused to such agent due to principal's neglect or want of skill. Thus, every
         principal owes to his agent the duty of care, and not to expose him to unreasonable
         risks.

         Example 39: A employs B as a bricklayer in building a house and puts up the
         scaffolding himself. The scaffolding is unskillfully put up, and B is in consequence
         hurt. A must compensate B.

    9.10 PRINCIPAL'S LIABILITY TO THIRD PARTIES

An agent does all acts on behalf of the principal but incurs no personal liability. The liability
remains that of the principal unless there is a contract to the contrary. This is because there
is no privity of contract and passing of consideration between the agent and third party. An
agent also cannot personally enforce contracts entered into by him on behalf of the
principal.

(i) Principal's liability for the Acts of the Agent [Section 226]: Principal is liable for
         the acts of agents which are within the scope of his authority.

         Example 40: A buys goods from B, knowing that he is an agent for their sale, but not
         knowing who is the principal. B's principal is the person entitled to claim from A the
         price of the goods, and A cannot, in a suit by the principal, set off against that claim
         a debt due to himself from B.

         Example 41: A, being B's agent with authority to receive money on his behalf,
         receives from C, a sum of money due to B. C is discharged of his· obligation to pay
         the sum in question to B.

(ii) Principal's liability when agent exceeds authority [Section 227]: When an agent
         does more than he is authorised to do, and when the part of what he does, which is
         within his authority, can be separated from the part which is beyond his authority, so
         much only of what he does as is within his authority is binding as between him and
         his principal.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.219

         Example 42: A, being owner of a ship and cargo, authorizes B to procure an
         insurance for ` 4,00,000 on the ship. B procures a policy for ` 4,00,000 on the ship,
         and another for the like sum on the cargo. A is bound to pay the premium for the
         policy on the ship, but not the premium for the policy on the cargo.

         Principal not bound when excess of agent's authority is not separable [Section
         228]: Where an agent does more than he is authorized to do, and what he does
         beyond the scope of his authority cannot be separated from what is within it, the
         principal is not bound to recognize the transaction.

         Example 43: A authorizes B to buy 500 sheep for him. B buys 500 sheep and 200
         lambs for one sum of ` 6,00,000. A may repudiate the whole transaction.

         Example 44: A authorizes B to draw bills to the extent ` 200 each. B draws bills in the
         name of A for ` 1,000 each. A may repudiate the whole transaction.

         Exception: Liability of principal inducing belief that agent's unauthorized acts
         were authorized [Section 237]: When an agent has, without authority, done acts or
         incurred obligations to third persons on behalf of his principal, the principal is bound
         by such acts or obligations, if he has by his words or conduct induced such third
         persons to believe that such acts and obligations were within the scope of the
         agent's authority.

         Example 45: A consigns goods to B for sale, and gives him instructions not to sell
         under a fixed price. C, being ignorant of B's instructions, enters into a contract with B
         to buy the goods at a price lower than the reserved price. A is bound by the contract.

         Example 46: A entrusts B with negotiable instruments endorsed in blank. B sells
         them to C in violation of private orders from A. The sale is good.

(iii) Consequences of notice given to agent [Section 229]: Any notice given to or
         information obtained by the agent, provided it be given or obtained in the course of
         the business transacted by him for the principal, shall, as between the principal and
         third parties, have the same legal consequence as if it had been given to or obtained
         by the principal.

         Example 47: A is employed by B to buy from C certain goods of which C is the
         apparent owner, and buys them accordingly. In the course of the treaty for the sale, A
         learns that the goods really belonged to D, but B is ignorant of that fact. B is not
         entitled to set off a debt owing to him from C against the price of the goods. Thus,
         the knowledge of the agent is treated as the knowledge of the principal.

(iv) Principal's liability for the agent's fraud, misrepresentation or torts [Section
         238]: Misrepresentations made, or frauds committed, by agents acting in the course
         of their business for their principals, have the same effect on agreements made by

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.220  BUSINESS LAWS

such agents as if such misrepresentations or frauds had been made, or committed, by
the principals; but misrepresentations made, or frauds committed, by agents, in
matters which do not fall within their authority, do not affect their principals.

Example 48: A, being B's agent for the sale of goods, induces C to buy them by a
misrepresentation, which he was not authorized by B to make. The contract is
voidable, as between B and C, at the option of C.

Example 49: A, the captain of B's ship, signs bills of lading without having received
on board the goods mentioned therein. The bills of lading are void as between B and
the pretended consignor.

    9.11 PERSONAL LIABILITY OF AGENT TO THIRD
             PARTIES

Agent cannot personally enforce, nor be bound by, contracts on behalf of principal
[Section 230]: In the absence of any contract to that effect, an agent cannot personally
enforce contracts entered into by him on behalf of his principal, nor is he personally bound
by them. He can neither sue nor be sued on contracts made by him on his principal's behalf.

EXCEPTIONS: In the following exceptional cases, the agent is presumed to have agreed to
be personally bound:

(1) Where the contract is made by an agent for the sale or purchase of goods for a
         merchant resident abroad/foreign principal: ­ When an agent has entered into a
         contract for the sale or purchase of goods on behalf of a principal resident abroad,
         the presumption is that the agent undertakes to be personally liable for the
         performances of such contract.

(2) Where the agent does not disclose the name of his principal or undisclosed
         principal; (Principal unnamed): when the agent does not disclose the name of the
         principal then there arises a presumption that he himself undertakes to be personally
         liable.

(3) Non-existent or incompetent principal: Where the principal, though disclosed,
         cannot be sued, the agent is presumed to be personally liable.

         Example 50: An agent who contracts for a minor, the minor being not liable, the
         agent becomes personally liable. This result, may not, however, follow where the
         other party already knows that the principal is a minor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                                  2.221

(4) Pretended agent ­ if the agent pretends but is not an actual agent, and the principal
         does not rectify the act but disowns it, the pretended agent will be himself liable
         (Section 235).

(5) When agent exceeds authority- When the agent exceeds his authority, misleads the
         third person in believing that the agent he has the requisite authority in doing the
         act, then the agent can be made liable personally for the breach of warranty of
         authority.

RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES

i.  Rights of parties to a contract made by undisclosed agent [Section 231]: If an

    agent makes a contract with a person who neither knows, nor has reason to suspect,

    that he is an agent, his principal may require the performance of the contract; but the

    other contracting party has, as against the principal, the same right as he would have

    had as against the agent if the agent had been the principal.

    If the principal discloses himself before the contract is completed, the other
    contracting party may refuse to fulfill the contract, if he can show that, if he had
    known who was the principal in the contract, or if he had known that the agent was
    not a principal, he would not have entered into the contract.

    Example 51: SS bought for himself a ticket of IPL match at Wankahde Stadium
    through AB because on personal grounds Stadium management would not have
    issued the ticket to SS. Stadium management may repudiate the contract and refuse
    SS to enter the stadium.

ii. Performance of contract with agent supposed to be principal [Section 232]:
         When agent does not disclosed that he is acting as an agent and the principal
         requires the performance of the contract then the principal can obtain such
         performance subject to the rights and obligations subsisting between the agent and
         the other party to the contract.

    Example 52: A, who owes 50,000 rupees to B, sells 1,00,000 rupees worth of rice to B.
    A is acting as agent for C in the transaction, but B has no knowledge nor reasonable
    ground of suspicion that such is the case. C cannot compel B to take the rice without
    allowing him to set off A's debt.

iii. Option to Third Person- sue the Agent or the Principal:

    a. Right of person dealing with agent personally liable [Section 233]: In
             cases where the agent is personally liable, a person dealing with him may hold
             either him or his principal, or both of them, liable.

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.222       BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 53: A enters into a contract with B to sell him 100 bales of cotton,
         and afterwards discovers that B was acting as agent for C. A may sue either B
         or C, or both, for the price of the cotton.

b. Consequence of inducing agent or principal to act on belief that principal
         or agent will be held exclusively liable [Section 234]: When a person who
         has made a contract with an agent induces the agent to act upon the belief
         that the principal only will be held liable, or induces the principal to act upon
         the belief that the agent only will be held liable, he cannot afterwards hold
         liable the agent or principal respectively.

    9.12 REVOCATION OF AUTHORITY

Termination of agency [Section 201]

Termination of agency means putting an end to the legal relationship between principal and
agent. Section 201 provides for the following modes of termination:

Revocation  Renunciation by                        Completion of  Death of Principal
                  agents                              business       or the agent

Principal or agent                                 Insolvency of  Expiry of time
   becoming of                                       principal
  unsound mind

a. Revocation: An agency may be terminated by the principal revoking the authority of
         the agent. Principal may revoke the authority given to his agent at any time before
         the authority has been exercised so as to bind the principal [Section 203]. However,
         the principal cannot revoke the authority given to his agent after the authority has
         been partly exercised so far as regards such acts and obligations as arise for acts
         already done in the agency. [Section 204]

         Example 54: A authorizes B to buy 1,000 bales of cotton on account of A, and to pay
         for it out of A's money remaining in B's hands. B buys 1,000 bales of cotton in his own
         name, so as to make himself personally liable for the price. A cannot revoke B's
         authority so far as regards payment for the cotton.

         Example 55: A authorizes B to buy 1,000 bales of cotton on account of A, and to pay
         for it out of A's money remaining in B's hands. B buys 1,000 bales of cotton in A's

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872               2.223

    name, and so as not to render himself personally liable for the price. A can revoke B's
    authority to pay for the cotton.

    Compensation for revocation by principal [Section 205]: If there is premature
    revocation of agency without sufficient cause, the principal must compensate the
    agent, for such revocation.

    Notice of revocation [Section 206]: When the principal, having justification to do
    so, revokes the authority, he must give reasonable notice of such revocation to the
    agent, otherwise, he can be liable to pay compensation for any damage caused to
    the agent (Section 206).

    Revocation and renunciation may be expressed or implied [Section 207]:
    Revocation of agency may be expressed or implied in the conduct of the principal.

    Example 56: A empowers B to let A's house. Afterwards A lets it himself. This is an
    implied revocation of B's authority.

b. Renunciation by agent [Section 206]: An agent may renounce the business of
         agency in the same manner in which the principal has the right of revocation. In the
         first place, if the agency is for a fixed period, the agent would have to compensate
         the principal for any premature renunciation without sufficient cause. [Section 205]
         Secondly, a reasonable notice of renunciation is necessary. Length of notice (time
         period of notice) is to be determined by the same principles which apply to
         revocation by the principal. If the agent renounces without proper notice, he shall
         have to make good any damage thereby resulting to the principal. [Section 206]

c.  Completion of business: An agency is automatically and by operation of law terminated

    when its business is completed. Thus, for example, the authority of an agent appointed

    to sell goods ceases to be exercisable when the sale is completed.

d. Death or insanity: An agency is determined automatically on the death or insanity of
         the principal or the agent. Winding up of a company or dissolution of partnership
         has the same effect. Act done by agent before death would remain binding.

e. Principal's insolvency: An agency ends on the principal being adjudicated insolvent.

f.  On expiry of time: Where an agent has been appointed for a fixed term, the

    expiration of the term puts an end to the agency, whether the purpose of agency has

    been accomplished or not. An agency comes to an automatic end on expiry of its

    term.

When the agency is irrevocable?

When the agent is personally interested in the subject matter of agency the agency becomes
irrevocable. Section 202 states that "where the agent has himself an interest in the property

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.224  BUSINESS LAWS

which forms the subject matter of the agency, the agency cannot, in the absence of an
express contract, be terminated to the prejudice of such interest."

Example 57: A gives authority to B to sell A's land, and to pay himself, out of the proceeds,
the debts due to him from A. A cannot revoke this authority, nor can it be terminated by his
insanity or death.

Example 58: A consigns 1000 bales of cotton to B, who has made advances to him on such
cotton, and desires B to sell the cotton, and to repay himself, out of the price, the amount of
his own advances. A cannot revoke this authority, nor it is terminated by his insanity or
death.

Effects of Termination [Section 208]

When termination of agent's authority takes effect as to agent, and as to third persons
[Section 208]: The termination of the authority of an agent does not, so far as regards the
agent, take effect before it becomes known to him, or, so far as regards third persons,
before it becomes known to them.

Example 59: A directs B to sell goods for him and agrees to give B five per cent commission on
the price fetched by the goods. A afterwards, by letter, revokes B's authority. B, after the letter is
sent, but before he receives it sells the goods for ` 1,00,000. The sale is binding on A, and B is
entitled to ` 5,000 as his commission.

Example 60: A, at Chennai, by letter directs B to sell for him some cotton lying in a
warehouse in Mumbai, and afterwards, by letter, revokes his authority to sell, and directs B
to send the cotton to Chennai. B, after receiving the second letter, enters into a contract
with C, who knows of the first letter, but not of the second, for the sale to him of the cotton.
C pays B the money, with which B absconds. C's payment is good as against A.

Example 61: A directs B, his agent, to pay certain money to C. A dies, and D takes out
probate to his will. B, after A's death, but before hearing of it, pays the money to C. The
payment is good as against D, the executor.

Agent's duty on termination of agency by principal's death or insanity [Section 209]:
When an agency is terminated by the principal dying or becoming of unsound mind, the
agent is bound to take on behalf of the representatives of his late principal, all reasonable
steps for the protection and preservation of the interests entrusted to him.

Termination of sub-agent's authority [Section 210]

The termination of the authority of an agent causes the termination (subject to the rules
herein contained regarding the termination of an agent's authority) of the authority of all
sub-agents appointed by him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872              2.225

SUMMARY

Agency: Relation between an agent and his principal created by an express/ implied agreement
authorising an agent by his principal to create contractual relations with third parties. Person so
appointed to represent the principal is called as agent whereas a person who appoints an agent
to represent him as per his directions and authority is called as principal.

  Agency can be either expressed or implied.

  Sub-agent: Person appointed by the original agent in the business of agency under his

  direction and control and being responsible to the principal for acts of a sub-agent.

  Substituted agent: Person is named by the agent expressly or impliedly to act for the

  principal in the business of agency.

  Ratification: Where acts are done by one person on behalf of another, but without his

  knowledge or authority, he may elect to ratify or to disown such acts. If he ratifies them,

  the same effects will follow as if they had been performed by his authority. Ratification

  may be expressed or may be implied in the conduct of the person on whose behalf the

  acts are done.

  Revocation of authority: An Agency is terminated (a) by the principal revoking his

  authority; or (b) by the agent renouncing the business of the agency; or (c) by the

  business of the agency being completed; or (d) by either the principal or agent dying or

  becoming of unsound mind; or (e) by either the principal or agent dying or becoming of

  unsound mind.

  Duties and obligations of an Agent: (a) Conduct the business according to principal's

  directions (b) Conduct the business with the skill and diligence (c) Render proper

  accounts (d) Communicate with principal in cases of difficulty (e) Repudiation of the

  transaction by principal (f) Not to deal on his own account (g) Agent's duty to pay sums

  received for principal.

  Rights of an Agent: (a) Right of retain out of sums received on principal's account (b)

  Right to remuneration (c) Agent's particular lien on principal's property (d) Right of

  indemnification for lawful acts (e) Right of indemnification against acts done in good

  faith.

                           AGENCY (SECTION 172-238)

  Agency: Relation between an agent and his principal created by an express/ implied agreement
  authorising an agent by his principal to create contractual relations with third parties.

   Agent: Person employed to do any act for           Principal: person for whom such act is done
   another, or to represent another.                  or who is so represented.

  Who can be Agent: any person including minor,      Who can appoint an Agent: Major, Person of
  Person of unsound mind                             sound mind

  © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.226                          BUSINESS LAWS

                               Modes of creation of Agency

By Express                    By Implied Agreement                                By         By
Agreement   a. Agency by Estoppel or holding out, b. By Necessity            Operation  Ratification

                                                                               of Law

                                                                             Essentials for Valid
                                                                                 Ratification

a. May be express or implied; b. Full knowledge of facts; c. Whole transaction must be ratified;
d. Ratification not put a third party to damages; e. Within reasonable time; f. Communication;
g. Act to be ratified must be valid

Extent of Agent's Authority                          Sub- Agent                               Substituted Agent

1. An agent, having an         A person who is appointed by and acts         A person appointed by agent to act for
authority to do an act, has    under the control and direction of original   principal with knowledge and consent of
authority to do every lawful   agent.                                        principal.
thing which is necessary in
order to do such act.                          Rules of Sub-Agent                       Rules of Substituted Agent

2. An agent having an          1. Work under control and directions of       1. Works under the instructions of the
authority to carry on a        agent.                                        principal.
business has authority to do
every lawful thing necessary   2. Agent delegates a part of his own duties   2. Agent does not delegate any part of his
for the purpose, or usually    to Sub Agent.                                 task to a substituted agent.
done in the course, of
conducting such business.      3. No privity of contract between principal   3. Privity of contract exists between a
                               and sub-agent.                                principal and a substituted agent.
3. In emergency, an agent has
authority to do all such acts  4. Sub-agent is responsible to the agent      4. Responsible to the principal.
for the purpose of protecting  only.
his principal from loss.                                                     5. Agent is not responsible to the principal
                               5. Agent is responsible to the principal for  for the acts of the substituted agent.
                               the acts of the sub- agent.
                                                                             6. Substituted agent can sue the principal for
                               6. Sub-agent has no right of action against   remuneration due to him.
                               the principal for remuneration due to him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                                                2.227

                 Duties & Rights of Agent                                     Termination of Agency

Duties of Agent                    Rights of Agent     Personal Liability    1. By Revocation
                                                             of Agent        2. By Renunciation by
1. To act according to Principal,  1. Right of                               agent
2. Reasonable care,                Retainer,          1. Foreign principal,  3. On completion of
3. Present proper accounts,                                                  business.
4. Communicate with principal,     2. To receive      2. Undisclosed         4. On death or insanity of
                                   agreed             principal,             Principal or Agent
                                   remuneration,                             5. Principal's insolvency
                                                      3. Principal           6. On expiry of time
5. Not to deal on his own account, 3. Right of lien,  incompetent,

6. Not to make secret profit,      4. Right of        4. Pretended Agent.
7. Not to delegate authority.      indemnification,
8. Pay sums received,                                 5. Acts beyond his
9. Not to Mis-use information      5. Right of        authority
obtained                           compensation for
                                   injuries.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. A person employed to do any act and represent is called ...........
         (a) agent
         (b) principal
         (c) owner
         (d) servant

2. Who can become an agent?
         (a) Both Minor & Adult
         (b) Minor
         (c) Adult person
         (d) Dead person

3. To create an agency, which is not required?
         (a) Principal
         (b) consideration

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.228                BUSINESS LAWS

    (c) agent

    (d) third party

4.  _______ is a person employed by, and acting under the control of original agent in the

    business of agency

    (a) A substituted agent

    (b) A sub agent

    (c) A mercantile agent

    (d) An universal agent

5. A substituted agent acts on behalf of ______

    (a) Principal

    (b) Sub-agent

    (c) Agent

    (d) None of these

6. The power given to agent is ...........

    (a) reasonable & unreasonable

    (b) expressed & implied

    (c) legal & illegal

    (d) all above

7. On whose insolvency the agency is terminated?

    (a) Sub agent

    (b) Agent

    (c) Principal

    (d) Del credere

8. Under which circumstances agent become personally responsible?

    (a) beyond authority

    (b) fraudulent transactions

    (c) fraud

    (d) All of above

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.229

9. It is the duty of the agent to protect and preserve the interest on behalf of the
         principal's representative in case of _______

         (a) Death of the principal

         (b) Insolvency of the principal

         (c) Both (a) & (b)

         (d) None of these

10. Agent should not to deal on his own account without first obtaining the consent of the
         principal, otherwise the principal may--

         (a) repudiate the transaction,

         (b) claim from the agent any benefit which may have resulted to him from the
                   transaction,

         (c) Either (a) or (b)

         (d) Both (a) & (b)

Descriptive Questions

1. A appoints M, a minor, as his agent to sell his watch for cash at a price not less than
         ` 700. M sells it to D for ` 350. Is the sale valid? Explain the legal position of M and D,
         referring to the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.

2. State with reason whether the following statement is correct or incorrect: Ratification of
         agency is valid even if knowledge of the principal is materially defective.

3. Rahul, a transporter was entrusted with the duty of transporting tomatoes from a rural
         farm to a city by Aswin. Due to heavy rains, Rahul was stranded for more than two
         days. Rahul sold the tomatoes below the market rate in the nearby market where he
         was stranded fearing that the tomatoes may perish. Can Aswin recover the loss from
         Rahul on the ground that Rahul had acted beyond his authority?

4. Mr. Ahuja of Delhi engaged Mr. Singh as his agent to buy a house in West Extension
         area. Mr. Singh bought a house for ` 20 lakhs in the name of a nominee and then
         purchased it himself for ` 24 lakhs. He then sold the same house to Mr. Ahuja for ` 26
         lakhs. Mr. Ahuja later comes to know the mischief of Mr. Singh and tries to recover the
         excess amount paid to Mr. Singh. Is he entitled to recover any amount from Mr. Singh?
         If so, how much? Explain.

5. Comment on the statement `Principal is not always bound by the acts of a sub-agent'.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         2.230        BUSINESS LAWS

6. ABC Ltd. sells its products through some agents and it is not the custom in their
         business to sell the products on credit. Mr. Pintu, one of the agents sold goods of ABC
         Ltd. to M/s. Parul Pvt. Ltd. (on credit) which was insolvent at the time of such sale. ABC
         Ltd. sued Mr. Pintu for compensation towards the loss caused due to sale of products to
         M/s. Parul Pvt. Ltd. Will ABC Ltd. succeed in its claim?

7. R is the wife of P. She purchased sarees on credit from Nalli. Nalli demanded the
         amount from P. P refused. Nalli filed a suit against P for the said amount. Decide in the
         light of provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, whether Nalli would succeed.

8. Bhupendra borrowed a sum of ` 3 lacs from Atul. Bhupendra appointed Atul as his
         agent to sell his land and authorized him to appropriate the amount of loan out of the
         sale proceeds. Afterward, Bhupendra revoked the agency.

         Decide under the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 whether the revocation of
         the said agency by Bhupendra is lawful.

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.  (a)  2.      (a)  3.                           (b)  4.  (b)  5.  (a)  6.  (b)

7.  (c)  8.      (d)  9.                           (c) 10. (d)

Answers to the Descriptive Questions

1. According to the provisions of Section 184 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, as
         between the principal and a third person, any person, even a minor may become an
         agent. But no person who is not of the age of majority and of sound mind can
         become an agent, so as to be responsible to his principal. Thus, if a person who is
         not competent to contract is appointed as an agent, the principal is liable to the third
         party for the acts of the agent. Thus, in the given case, D gets a good title to the
         watch. M is not liable to A for his negligence in the performance of his duties.

2. Incorrect: Section 198 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 provides that for a valid
         ratification, the person who ratifies the already performed act must be without defect
         and have clear knowledge of the facts of the case. If the principal's knowledge is
         materially defective, the ratification is not valid and hence no agency.

3. Agent's authority in an emergency (Section 189 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872):
         An agent has authority, in an emergency, to do all such acts for the purpose of
         protecting his principal from loss as would be done by a person of ordinary prudence, in
         his own case, under similar circumstances.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.231

         In the instant case, Rahul, the agent, was handling perishable goods like `tomatoes'
         and can decide the time, date and place of sale, not necessarily as per instructions of
         the Aswin, the principal, with the intention of protecting Aswin from losses.

         Here, Rahul acts in an emergency as a man of ordinary prudence, so Aswin will not
         succeed against him for recovering the loss.

4. The problem in this case, is based on the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
         as contained in Section 215 read with Section 216. The two sections provide that
         where an agent without the knowledge of the principal, deals in the business of
         agency on his own account, the principal may:

         (1) repudiate the transaction, if the case shows, either that the agent has
                   dishonestly concealed any material fact from him, or that the dealings of the
                   agent have been disadvantageous to him.

         (2) claim from the agent any benefit, which may have resulted to him from the
                   transaction.

         Therefore, based on the above provisions, Mr. Ahuja is entitled to recover ` 6 lakhs
         from Mr. Singh being the amount of profit earned by Mr. Singh out of the
         transaction.

5. The statement is correct. Normally, a sub-agent is not appointed, since it is a
         delegation of power by an agent given to him by his principal. The governing
         principle is, a delegate cannot delegate'. (Latin version of this principle is,
         "delegates non potest delegare"). However, there are certain circumstances where
         an agent can appoint sub-agent.

         In case of proper appointment of a sub-agent, by virtue of Section 192 of the Indian
         Contract Act, 1872 the principal is bound by and is held responsible for the acts of
         the sub-agent. Their relationship is treated to be as if the sub-agent is appointed by
         the principal himself.

         However, if a sub-agent is not properly appointed, the principal shall not be bound
         by the acts of the sub-agent. Under the circumstances the agent appointing the sub-
         agent shall be bound by these acts and he (the agent) shall be bound to the principal
         for the acts of the sub-agent.

6. To conduct the business of agency according to the principal's directions
         (Section 211 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872): An agent is bound to conduct the
         business of his principal according to the direction given by the principal, or, in the
         absence of any such directions, according to the custom which prevails in doing
         business of the same kind at the place where the agent conducts such business.
         When the agent acts otherwise, if any loss be sustained, he must make it good to his
         principal, and, if any profit accrues, he must account for it.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.232  BUSINESS LAWS

         In the present case, Mr. Pintu, one of the agents, sold goods of ABC Ltd. to M/s Parul
         Pvt. Ltd. (on credit) which was insolvent at the time of such sale. Also, it is not the
         custom in ABC Ltd. to sell the products on credit.

         Hence, Mr. Pintu must make good the loss to ABC Ltd.

7. The position of husband and wife is special and significant case of implied authority.
         According to the Indian Contract Act 1872, where the husband and wife are living
         together in a domestic establishment of their own, the wife shall have an implied
         authority to pledge the credit of her husband for necessaries. However, the implied
         authority can be challenged by the husband only in the following circumstances.

         (1) The husband has expressly forbidden the wife from borrowing money or
                   buying goods on credit.

         (2) The articles purchased did not constitute necessities.

         (3) Husband had given sufficient funds to the wife for purchasing the articles she
                   needed to the knowledge of the seller.

         (4) The creditor had been expressly told not to give credit to the wife.

         Further, where the wife lives apart from husband without any of her fault, she shall
         have an implied authority to bind the husband for necessaries, if he does not provide
         for her maintenance.

         Since, none of the above criteria is being fulfilled; Nalli would be successful in
         recovering its money.

8. According to Section 202 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 an agency becomes
         irrevocable where the agent has himself an interest in the property which forms the
         subject-matter of the agency, and such an agency cannot, in the absence of an express
         provision in the contract, be terminated to the prejudice of such interest.

         In the instant case, the rule of agency coupled with interest applies and does not
         come to an end even on death, insanity or the insolvency of the principal.

         Thus, when Bhupendra appointed Atul as his agent to sell his land and authorized
         him to appropriate the amount of loan out of the sale proceeds, interest was created
         in favor of Atul and the said agency is not revocable. The revocation of agency by
         Bhupendra is not lawful.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
