       2.58         BUSINESS LAWS

       UNIT-3: OTHER ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF A
                               CONTRACT

                                        LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:

 The various ingredients of incapacity to contract.
 The legal consequence of contracting with a minor.
 The concept of `consensus ad idem' i.e. parties agreeing upon the

       same thing in the same sense.
 The characteristics of different elements vitiating free consent and

       particularly to distinguish amongst fraud, misrepresentation and
       mistake.
 The circumstances when object and consideration become
       unlawful.
 Agreements opposed to public policy.

UNIT OVERVIEW

                                  Essential Elements of a Valid
                                               Contract

       Capacity to                                        Free            Lawful           Not
        Contract                                       Consent       Consideration      Expressly
                                                                                        declared
                                                   Not Caused by        & Object
                                                                                          Void
       Sound             Not
Major  Mind         Disqualified

                    Coercion                        Undue     Fraud  Misrepresentation  Mistake
                                                   Influence

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.59

It has already been discussed that an agreement results from a proposal by one party and its
acceptance by the other party. We have already discussed offer, acceptance and
consideration in detail. We shall now discuss in detail the elements which constitute a valid
contract enforceable in law.
Section 10 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 provides that an agreement in order to be a
contract, must satisfy the following conditions:
(1) the parties must be competent to contract;
(2) it must be made by the free consent of the parties;

(3) it must be made for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object;
(4) it should not have been expressly declared as void by law.

    3.1 CAPACITY TO CONTRACT

Meaning: Capacity refers to the competence of the parties to make a contract. It is one of
the essential elements to form a valid contract.
Who is competent to contract (Section 11)
Every person is competent to contract who-

(A) has attained the age of majority,
(B) is of sound mind and
(C) is not disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject.

(A) Age of Majority: In India, the age of majority is regulated by the Indian Majority
         Act, 1875.
         Every person domiciled in India shall attain the age of majority on the completion of
         18 years of age and not before. The age of majority being 18 years, a person less
         than that age even by a day would be minor for the purpose of contracting.
         Law relating to Minor's agreement/Position of Minor
         1. A contract made with or by a minor is void ab-initio: A minor is not
                   competent to contract and any agreement with or by a minor is void from the
                   very beginning.

                   In the leading case of Mohori Bibi vs. Dharmo Das Ghose (1903), ""Mr. D a
                   minor, mortgaged his house for Rs. 20,000 to money lender, but the
                   mortgagee i.e. money lender has paid him Rs. 8,000. Subsequently the minor

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.60  BUSINESS LAWS

         had filed a suit for cancellation of contract. Held the contract is void as Mr. D
         is minor and therefore he is not liable to pay anything to lender."

2. No ratification after attaining majority: A minor cannot ratify the
         agreement on attaining majority as the original agreement is void ab initio
         and a void agreement can never be ratified.

         Example 1: X, a minor makes a promissory note in favour of Y. On attaining
         majority, he cannot ratify it and if he makes a new promissory note in place of
         old one, here the new promissory note which he executed after attaining
         majority is also void being without consideration.

3. Minor can be a beneficiary or can take benefit out of a contract: Though a
         minor is not competent to contract, nothing in the Contract Act prevents the
         minor from making the other party bound to him. Thus, a promissory note
         duly executed in favour of a minor is not void and can be sued upon by him,
         because he though incompetent to contract, may yet accept a benefit.

         A minor cannot become partner in a partnership firm. However, he may with
         the consent of all the partners, be admitted to the benefits of partnership
         (Section 30 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932).

         Example 2: A mortgage was executed in favour of a minor. Held, he can get a
         decree for the enforcement of the mortgage.

4. A minor can always plead minority: A minor can always plead minority and
         is not stopped to do so even where he has taken any loan or entered into any
         contract by falsely representing that he was major. Rule of estoppel cannot be
         applied against a minor. It means he can be allowed to plea his minority in
         defence.

         Example 3: A, a minor has falsely induced himself as major and contracted
         with Mr. X for loan of ` 20,000. When Mr. X asked for the repayment A denied
         to pay. He pleaded that he was a minor so cannot enter into any contract.
         Held, A cannot be held liable for repayment of amount. However, if he has not
         spent the same, he may be asked to repay it but the minor shall not be liable
         for any amount which he has already spent even though he received the same
         by fraud. Thus, a minor can always plead minority and is not estopped from
         doing so even where he had produced a loan or entered into some other
         contract by falsely representing that he was of full age, when in reality he was
         a minor.

5. Liability for necessaries: The case of necessaries supplied to a minor or to
         any other person whom such minor is legally bound to support is governed by

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.61

         section 68 of the Indian Contract Act. A claim for necessaries supplied to a
         minor is enforceable by law. But a minor is not liable for any price that he may
         promise and never for more than the value of the necessaries. There is no
         personal liability of the minor, but only his property is liable.

         To render minor's estate liable for necessaries two conditions must be
         satisfied.

         (i) The contract must be for the goods reasonably necessary for his
                   support in the station in life.

         (ii) The minor must not have already a sufficient supply of these
                   necessaries.

         Necessaries mean those things that are essentially needed by a minor. They
         cannot include luxuries or costly or unnecessary articles. Necessaries extend
         to all such things as reasonable persons would supply to an infant in that class
         of society to which the infant belongs. Expenses on minor's education, on
         funeral ceremonies come within the scope of the word `necessaries'.

         The whole question turns upon the minor's status in life. Utility rather than
         ornament is the criterion.

         Example 4: Shruti being a minor purchased a laptop for her online classes of
         ` 70,000 on credit from a shop. But her assets could pay only ` 20,000. The
         shop keeper could not hold Shruti personally liable and could recover only
         amount recoverable through her assets i.e. upto ` 20,000.

6. Contract by guardian - how far enforceable: Though a minor's agreement is
         void, his guardian can, under certain circumstances enter into a valid contract
         on minor's behalf. Where the guardian makes a contract for the minor, which
         is within his competence and which is for the benefit of the minor, there will
         be valid contract which the minor can enforce.

         But all contracts made by guardian on behalf of a minor are not valid. For
         instance, the guardian of a minor has no power to bind the minor by a contact
         for the purchase of immovable Property. But a contract entered into by a
         certified guardian (appointed by the Court) of a minor, with the sanction of
         the court for the sale of the minor's property, may be enforced by either party
         to the contract.

7. No specific performance: A minor's agreement being absolutely void, there
         can be no question of the specific performance of such an agreement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.62  BUSINESS LAWS

8. No insolvency: A minor cannot be declared insolvent as he is incapable of
         contracting debts and dues are payable from the personal properties of minor
         and he shall never be held personally liable.

9. Partnership: A minor being incompetent to contract cannot be a partner in a
         partnership firm, but under Section 30 of the Indian Partnership Act, he can be
         admitted to the benefits of partnership.

10. Minor can be an agent: A minor can act as an agent. But he will not be liable
         to his principal for his acts. A minor can draw, deliver and endorse negotiable
         instruments without himself being liable.

         Example 5: A minor can have an account in the bank. He can draw a cheque
         for his purchases. But he shall not be liable for cheque bounces nor can he be
         sued under court of law for any fraud done from his account.

11. Minor cannot bind parent or guardian: In the absence of authority, express
         or implied, an infant is not capable of binding his parent or guardian, even for
         necessaries. The parents will be held liable only when the child is acting as an
         agent for parents.

         Example 6: Richa a minor entered into contract of buying a scooty from the
         dealer and mentioned that her parents will be liable for the payment of
         scooty. The dealer sent a letter to her parents for money. The parents will not
         be liable for such payment as the contract was entered by a minor in their
         absence and out of their knowledge.

12. Joint contract by minor and adult: In such a case, the adult will be liable on
         the contract and not the minor. In Sain Das vs. Ram Chand, where there was
         a joint purchase by two purchasers, one of them was a minor, it was held that
         the vendor could enforce the contract against the major purchaser and not
         the minor.

13. Surety (Guarantor) for a minor: In a contract of guarantee when an adult
         stands surety for a minor then he (adult) is liable to third party as there is
         direct contract between the surety and the third party.

         Example 7: Mr. X guaranteed for the purchase of a mobile phone by Krish, a
         minor. In case of failure for payment by Krish, Mr. X will be liable to make the
         payment.

14. Minor as Shareholder: A minor, being incompetent to contract cannot be a
         shareholder of the company. If by mistake he becomes a member, the
         company can rescind the transaction and remove his name from register. But,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.63

                   a minor may, acting though his lawful guardian become a shareholder by
                   transfer or transmission of fully paid shares to him.

         15. Liability for torts: A tort is a civil wrong. A minor is liable in tort unless the
                   tort in reality is a breach of contract. Thus, where a minor borrowed a horse
                   for riding only, he was held liable when he lent the horse to one of his friends
                   who jumped and killed the horse. Similarly, a minor was held liable for his
                   failure to return certain instruments which he had hired and then passed on to
                   a friend.

(B) Person of sound mind: According to Section 12 of Indian Contract Act, "a person is
         said to be of sound mind for the purposes of making a contract if, at the time when
         he makes it is capable of understanding it and of forming a rational judgement as to
         its effect upon his interests."

         A person who is usually of unsound mind, but occasionally of sound mind, may make
         a contract when he is of sound mind.

         A person who is usually of sound mind, but occasionally of unsound mind, may not
         make a contract when he is of unsound mind.

         Example 8: A patient in a lunatic asylum, who is at intervals, of sound mind, may
         contract during those intervals.

         Example 9: A sane man, who is delirious from fever, or who is so drunk that he
         cannot understand the terms of a contract, or form a rational judgement as to its
         effect on his interests, cannot contract whilst such delirium or drunkenness lasts.

         Position of unsound mind person making a contract: A contract by a person who
         is not of sound mind is void.

(C) Contract by disqualified persons: Besides minors and persons of unsound mind,
         there are also other persons who are disqualified from contracting, partially or
         wholly, so that the contracts by such person are void. Incompetency to contract may
         arise from political status, corporate status, legal status, etc. The following persons
         fall in this category: Foreign Sovereigns and Ambassadors, Alien enemy,
         Corporations, Convicts, Insolvent etc.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.64  BUSINESS LAWS

3.2 FREE CONSENT

      Consent is not free when it is caused by

Coercion Undue influence Fraud Misrepresentation Mistake

      Contract is Voidable                         Contract is Void

      Bilateral Mistake                            Unilateral Mistake

As to subject matter Possibility of performance

      Nature of Contract                           As to identity of person

Definition of Consent according to Section 13:

"two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon the same
thing in the same sense."

Parties are said to have consented when they not only agreed upon the same thing but also
agreed upon that thing in the same sense. `Same thing' must be understood as the whole
content of the agreement. Consequently, when parties to a contract make some
fundamental error as to the nature of the transaction, or as to the person dealt with or as to
the subject-matter of the agreement, it cannot be said that they have agreed upon the same
thing in the same sense. And if they do not agree in the same sense, there cannot be
consent. A contract cannot arise in the absence of consent.

If two persons enter into an apparent contract concerning a particular person or ship, and it
turns out that each of them, misled by similarity of name, had a different person or ship in
his mind, no contract would exist between them as they were not ad idem, i.e., of the same
mind. Again, ambiguity in the terms of an agreement, or an error as to the nature of any
transaction or as to the subject-matter of any agreement may prevent the formation of any
contract on the ground of absence of consent. In the case of fundamental error, there is
really no consent whereas, in the case of mistake, there is no real consent.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                                   2.65

As has been said already, one of the essential elements of a contract is consent and there
cannot be a contract without consent. Consent may be free or not free. Only free consent is
necessary for the validity of a contract.

Definition of `Free Consent' (Section 14)

Consent is said to be free when it is not caused by:

1.  Coercion, as defined in Section 15; or

2.  Undue Influence, as defined in Section 16; or

3.  Fraud, as defined in Section 17; or

4.  Misrepresentation, as defined in Section 18 or

5.  Mistake, subject to the provisions of Sections 20, 21, and 22.

When consent to an agreement is caused by coercion, fraud, misrepresentation, or undue
influence, the agreement is a contract voidable at the option of the party whose consent was
so caused. When the consent is vitiated by mistake, the contract becomes void.

    3.3 ELEMENTS VITIATING FREE CONSENT

We shall now explain these elements one by one.

I   Coercion (Section 15)

"Coercion' is the committing, or threatening to commit, any act forbidden by the Indian Penal
Code or the unlawful detaining, or threatening to detain any property, to the prejudice of any
person whatever, with the intention of causing any person to enter into an agreement."

It is to be noted that the section does not require that coercion must proceed from a party
to the contract; nor is it necessary that subject of the coercion must be the other contracting
party, it may be directed against any third person whatever.

Effects of coercion under section 19 of Indian Contract Act, 1872

(i) Contract induced by coercion is voidable at the option of the party whose consent
         was so obtained.

(ii) A person to whom money has been paid or anything delivered under coercion must
         repay or return it. (Section 72)

Threat to commit suicide ­ Whether is it coercion?

Suicide though forbidden by Indian Penal Code is not punishable, as a dead man cannot be
punished. But Section 15 declares that committing or threatening to commit any act

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.66  BUSINESS LAWS

forbidden by Indian Penal Code is coercion. Hence, a threat to commit suicide will be
regarded as coercion.

Example 10: Where husband obtained a release deed from his wife and son under a threat
of committing suicide, the transaction was set aside on the ground of coercion, suicide
being forbidden by the Indian Penal Code.

Example 11: An agent refused to give books of accounts to the principal unless he frees
him from all his liabilities. The principal had to give the release deed. Held, the contract was
under coercion by unlawful detaining of the principal's property.

II  Undue influence (Section 16)

According to section 16 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, "A contract is said to be induced
by `undue influence' where the relations subsisting between the parties are such that one of
the parties is in a position to dominate the will of the other and he uses that position to
obtain an unfair advantage over the other".

Example 12: A having advanced money to his son, B, during his minority, upon B's coming
of age obtains, by misuse of parental influence, a bond from B for a greater amount than the
sum due in respect of the advance. A employs undue influence.

The essential ingredients under this provision are:

(1) Relation between the parties: A person can be influenced by the other when a near
         relation between the two exists.

(2) Position to dominate the will: Relation between the parties exist in such a manner
         that one of them is in a position to dominate the will of the other. A person is
         deemed to be in such position in the following circumstances:

    (a) Real and apparent authority: Where a person holds a real authority over the
             other as in the case of master and servant, doctor and patient and etc.

    Example 13: A father, by reason of his authority over the son can dominate
    the will of the son.

    (b) Fiduciary relationship: Where relation of trust and confidence exists between
             the parties to a contract. Such type of relationship exists between father and
             son, solicitor and client, husband and wife, creditor and debtor, etc.

    Example 14: By reason of fiduciary relationship, a solicitor can dominate the
    will of his client and a trustee can dominate the will of the beneficiary.

    Example 15: A spiritual guru induced his devotee to gift to him the whole of
    his property in return of a promise of salvation of the devotee. Held, the
    consent of the devotee was given under undue influence. Here, the

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.67

                   relationship was fiduciary relationship between Guru and devotee and Guru
                   was in a position to dominate the will of devotee.

         (c) Mental distress: An undue influence can be used against a person to get his
                   consent on a contract where the mental capacity of the person is temporarily
                   or permanently affected by the reason of mental or bodily distress, illness or
                   of old age.

                   Example 16: A doctor is deemed to be in a position to dominate the will of
                   his patient enfeebled by protracted illness.

         (d) Unconscionable bargains: Where one of the parties to a contract is in a
                   position to dominate the will of the other and the contract is apparently
                   unconscionable i.e., unfair, it is presumed by law that consent must have been
                   obtained by undue influence. Unconscionable bargains are witnessed mostly
                   in money-lending transactions and in gifts.

                   Example 17: A, being in debt to B, the money-lender of his village, contracts a
                   fresh loan on terms which appear to be unconscionable. It lies on B to prove
                   that the contract was not induced by undue influence.

                   Example 18: A applies to a banker for a loan at a time when there is a
                   stringency in money market. The banker declines to make the loan except at
                   an unusually high rate of interest. A accepts the loan on these terms. This is a
                   transaction in the ordinary course of business, and the contract is not induced
                   by undue influence.

(3) The object must be to take undue advantage: Where the person is in a position to
         influence the will of the other in getting consent, must have the object to take
         advantage of the other.

         Example 19: A teacher asks her daughter to get marry to one of his brilliant
         students. Both the girl and boy were smart, settled and intelligent. Here the teacher
         had a relation which can have influence on both of them. But as no undue advantage
         of such influence was taken such contract of marriage is said to be made by free
         consent.

(4) Burden of proof: When a party to contract decides to avoid the contract on the
         ground of undue influence, he has to prove that-

         (a) The other party is in position to dominate his will,

         (b) the other party actually used his position to obtain his consent,

         (c) transaction is unfair or unconscionable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.68  BUSINESS LAWS

Effect of undue influence- (Section 19A)

(i) When consent to an agreement is caused by undue influence, the agreement is a
         contract voidable at the option of the party whose consent was so caused.

(ii) Any such contract may be set aside either absolutely or, if the party who was entitled
         to avoid it has received any benefit thereunder, upon such terms and conditions as to
         the Court may seem just.

Example 20: A, a money lender advances ` 1,00,000 to B, an agriculturist, and by undue
influence induces B to execute a bond for ` 2,00,000 with interest at 6 percent per month.
The court may set aside the bond, ordering B to repay ` 1,00,000 with such interest as may
seem just.

III Fraud (Section 17)

Definition of Fraud under Section 17: `Fraud' means and includes any of the following acts
committed by a party to a contract, or with his connivance, or by his agent, with an intent to
deceive another party thereto or his agent, or to induce him to enter into the contract:

(1) the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one who does not believe it to
         be true;

(2) the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact;

(3) a promise made without any intention of performing it;

(4) any other act fitted to deceive;

(5) any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent.

The following are the essential elements of the fraud:

(1) There must be a representation or assertion and it must be false. However, silence
         may amount to fraud or an active concealment may amount to fraud.

         Whether Silence is fraud or not?

         As per explanation of section 17, silence is fraud in following situations:

         (a) There is duty to speak.

                   Example 21: A sell, by auction, to B, a horse which A knows to be unsound, A
                   says nothing to B about the unsoundness of the horse. This is not fraud by A.

                   Example 22: In the above example, B is A's daughter. Here, the relation
                   between the parties would make it A's duty to tell B if the horse is unsound.

         (b) When silence is equal to speech.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.69

         Example 23: B says to A ­"If you do not deny it, I shall assume that the horse is
         sound". A says nothing. Here A's silence is equivalent to speech.

(2) The representation must be related to a fact.

         Example 24: `A' who is about to sell goods says that goods cost him Rs. 50,000. This
         is statement of fact. But if he says the goods are worth Rs. 50,000, it is a statement of
         opinion.

(3) The representation should be made before the conclusion of the contract with the
         intention to induce the other party to act upon it.

(4) The representation or statement should be made with a knowledge of its falsity or
         without belief in its truth or recklessly not caring whether it is true or false.

(5) The other party must have been induced to act upon the representation or assertion.

         Example 25: `A' bought shares in a company on the faith of a prospectus which
         contained an untrue statement that `B' was a director of the company. `A' had never
         heard of `B' and, therefore, the statement was immaterial from his point of view. A's
         claim for damages in this case was dismissed because the untrue statement had not
         induced `A' to buy the shares.

(6) The other party must have relied upon the representation and must have been
         deceived.

(7) The other party acting on the representation must have consequently suffered a loss.

Effect of Fraud upon validity of a contract: When the consent to an agreement in caused
by the fraud, the contract is voidable at option of the party defrauded and he has the
following remedies:

(1) He can rescind the contract within a reasonable time.

(2) He can sue for damages.

(3) He can insist on the performance of the contract on the condition that he shall be
         put in the position in which he would have been had the representation made been
         true.

Exception: In the following cases, contract is not voidable:

(i) If the party whose consent was caused by silence which amounting to fraud, had the
         means of discovering the truth with ordinary diligence.

(ii) A fraud which did not cause the consent of the party to agreement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.70                     BUSINESS LAWS

IV Misrepresentation (Section 18)

According to Section 18, there is misrepresentation:

(1) Statement of fact, which of false, would constitute misrepresentation if the maker
         believes it to be true but which is not justified by the information he possesses;

(2) When there is a breach of duty by a person without any intention to deceive which
         brings an advantage to him;

(3) When a party causes, even though done innocently, the other party to the agreement
         to make a mistake as to the subject matter.

         Example 26: A makes a positive statement to B that C will be made the director of a
         company. A makes the statement on information derived, not directly from C but
         from M. B applies for shares on the faith of the statement which turns out to be false.
         The statement amounts to misrepresentation, because the information received
         second-hand did not warrant A to make the positive statement to B.

         Example 27: `A' believed the engine of his motor cycle to be in an excellent
         condition. `A' without getting it checked in a workshop, told to `B' that the motor
         cycle was in excellent condition. On this statement, `B' bought the motor cycle, whose
         engine proved to be defective. Here, `A's statement is misrepresentation as the
         statement turns out to be false.

         Example 28: A while selling his mare to B, tells him that the mare is thoroughly
         sound. A genuinely believes the mare to be sound although he has no sufficient
         ground for the belief. Later on, B finds the mare to be unsound. The representation
         made by A is a misrepresentation.

         Example 29: A buy an article thinking that it is worth ` 1000 when in fact it is worth
         only ` 500. There has been no misrepresentation on the part of the seller. The
         contract is valid.

Difference between Coercion and Undue influence:

Basis of difference      Coercion                       Undue Influence

Nature of action         It involves the physical force It involves moral or mental
                         or threat. The aggrieved pressure.
                         party is compelled to make
                         the contract against its will.

Involvement of criminal  It involves committing or      No such illegal act is
action                   threatening to commit and      committed or a threat is given.
                         act forbidden by Indian Penal
                         Code or detaining or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872            2.71

                         threatening to detain
                         property unlawfully.

Relationship    between  It is not necessary that there  Some sort of relationship
parties                  must be some sort of            between the parties is
                         relationship between the        absolutely necessary.
                         parties.

Exercised by whom        Coercion need not proceed       Undue influence is always
                         from the promisor nor need      exercised between parties to
                         it be the directed against the  the contract.
                         promisor. It can be used even
                         by a stranger to the contract.

Enforceability           The contract is voidable at     Where the consent is induced
                         the option of the party         by undue influence, the
                         whose consent has been          contract is either voidable or
                         obtained by the coercion.       the court may set it aside or
                                                         enforce it in a modified form.

Position of benefits In case of coercion where the The court has the discretion to

received                 contract is rescinded by the direct the aggrieved party to

                         aggrieved party, as per return the benefit in whole or in

                         Section 64, any benefit part or not to give any such

                         received has to be restored directions.

                         back to the other party.

Distinction between fraud and misrepresentation:

Basis of difference Fraud                                Misrepresentation

Intention           To deceive the other party by There is no such intention to

                    hiding the truth.                    deceive the other party.

Knowledge of truth  The person making              the The person making the
                    suggestion believes that       the statement believes it to be
                    statement as untrue.
                                                          true, although it is not true.

Rescission of the   The injured party can repudiate      The injured party is entitled
contract and claim  the contract and claim damages.      to repudiate the contract or
for damages                                              sue for restitution but
                                                         cannot claim the damages.

Means to discover   The party using the fraudulent act   Party can always plead that
the truth           cannot secure or protect himself     the injured party had the
                    by saying that the injured party     means to discover the truth.
                    had means to discover the truth.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         2.72             BUSINESS LAWS

         Mistake of Law   Mistake of Indian Law
                          Mistake of Foreign Law

                                                                       Quality

                                                                       existence

Mistake                                            Mistake as to       Identity
                                                   subject matter        Title

                          Bilateral                                      Price
                                                                       Quantity

         Mistake of Fact                              Mistake as to     Legal
                                                      possibility of   Physical
                                                      performance
                          Unilateral
                                                   Identity of person

                                                      Character of
                                                   written document

Mistake: Mistake may be defined as innocent or erroneous belief which leads the party to
misunderstand the others. Mistake may be either mistake of law or mistake of fact.

Mistake of Law: Mistake of law is further classified as mistake of Indian law or mistake of
foreign law.

(i) Mistake of Indian Law: A person cannot be allowed to get any relief on the ground
that it had done a particular act in ignorance of law.

Example 30: A and B enter into a contract on the erroneous belief that a particular debt is
barred by the Indian Law of Limitation. This contract is not voidable.

(ii) Mistake of foreign law: Such a mistake is treated as mistake of fact and the
agreement in such a case is void.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.73

Mistake of fact: Mistake of fact are of two types ­ (i) Bilateral Mistake, (ii) Unilateral Mistake

(i) Bilateral mistake: Where both the parties to an agreement are under a mistake as to
a matter of fact essential to the agreement, there is a bilateral mistake. In such a case, the
agreement is void (Section 20).

Cases of Bilateral Mistakes

(i) Mistake as to the quality of the subject-matter.

(ii) Mistake as to the existence of the subject-matter.

(iii) Mistake as to the identity of the subject-matter.

(iv) Mistake as to the title of the subject-matter.

(v) Mistake as to the price of the subject-matter.

(vi) Mistake as to the quantity of the subject-matter.

(ii) Unilateral Mistake: According to Section 22, a contract is not voidable merely
because it was caused by one of the parties to it being under a mistake as to a matter of
fact.

    3.4 LEGALITY OF OBJECT AND CONSIDERATION

Which considerations and objects are lawful, and those which are not (Section 23):

Under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, in each of the following cases the consideration
or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful:

(i) When consideration or object is forbidden by law: Acts forbidden by law are those
         which are punishable under any statute as well as those prohibited by regulations or
         orders made in exercise of the authority conferred by the legislature.

         Example 31: A father had arranged for marriage of his 17 years boy and took dowry
         from the girl's parents. Such marriage contract cannot take place as in India the
         minimum age for boy marriage is 21 years and dowry is not permissible in Indian law.
         Such is not a valid contract as the consideration and object both are forbidden by
         law.

(ii) When consideration or object are of such a nature that if permitted it would
         defeats the provisions of law:

         If the consideration or the object of an agreement is of such a nature that not directly
         but indirectly, it would defeat the provisions of the law, the agreement is void.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.74  BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 32: A's estate is sold for arrears of revenue under the provisions of an Act
         of the Legislature, by which the defaulter is prohibited from purchasing the estate. B,
         upon an understanding with A, becomes the purchaser, and agrees to convey the
         estate to A upon receiving from him the price which B has paid. The agreement is
         void, as it renders the transaction, in effect, a purchase by the defaulter, and would
         so defeat the object of the law.

(iii) When it is fraudulent: Agreements which are entered into to promote fraud are
         void.

         Example 33: A, B and C enter into an agreement for the division among them of
         gains acquired, or to be acquired, by them by fraud. The agreement is void, as its
         object, viz., acquisition of gains by fraud is unlawful.

(iv) The general term "injury" means criminal or wrongful harm. In the following
         examples, the object or consideration is unlawful as it involves injury to the person or
         property of another.

         Example 34: An agreement to print a book in violation of another's copyright is void,
         as the object is to cause injury to the property of another. It is also void as the object
         of the agreement is forbidden by the law relating to copyright.

         Example 35: A promises to repay his debt by doing manual labour daily for a special
         period and agrees to pay interest at an exorbitant rate in case of default. Here A's
         promise to repay by manual labour is the consideration for the loan, and this
         consideration is illegal as it imposes what, in substance, amounts to slavery on the
         part of A. In other words, as the consideration involves injury to the person A, the
         consideration is illegal. Here, the object too is illegal, as it seeks to impose slavery
         which is opposed to public policy. Hence, the agreement is void.

(v) When consideration is immoral: The following are the examples of agreements
         where the object or consideration is unlawful, being immoral.

         Example 36: Where P had advanced money to D, a married woman to enable her to
         obtain a divorce from her husband and D had agreed to marry him as soon as she
         could obtain the divorce, it was held that P was not entitled to recover the amount,
         since the agreement had for its object the divorce of D from her husband and the
         promise of marriage given under these circumstances was against good morals.

         Example 37: A asks B, "If you arrange a girl for marriage with me, I will give
         ` 50,000." Here contract is void as it is immoral.

(vi) When consideration is opposed to public policy: The expression `public policy' can
         be interpreted either in a wide or in a narrow sense. The freedom to contract may

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.75

         become illusory, unless the scope of `public policy' is restricted. In the name of public
         policy, freedom of contract is restricted by law only for the good for the community.

         Some of the agreements which are held to be opposed to public policy
         are-

(1) Trading with enemy: Any trade with person owing allegiance to a Government at
         war with India without the licence of the Government of India is void, as the object is
         opposed to public policy. Here, the agreement to trade offends against the public
         policy by tending to prejudice the interest of the State in times of war.

         Example 38: India entered in war like situation with China. Mr. A from India entered
         into contract with China for import of toys. Such contract is void as China is alien
         enemy of India. The contract if made before such war like situation may be
         suspended or dissolved. Like India felt apps like tik tok and PUBG will provide some
         internal information of the country, hence such apps were banned and any contract
         with them were dissolved.

(2) Stifling Prosecution: An agreement to stifle prosecution i.e. "an agreement to
         present proceedings already instituted from running their normal course using force"
         tends to be a perversion or an abuse of justice; therefore, such an agreement is void.
         The principle is that one should not make a trade of felony. The compromise of any
         public offence is generally illegal.

         Under the Indian Criminal Procedure Code, there is, however, a statutory list of
         compoundable offences and an agreement to drop proceeding relating to such
         offences with or without the permission of the Court, as the case may be, in
         consideration the accused promising to do something for the complainant, is not
         opposed to public policy. Thus, where A agrees to sell certain land to B in
         consideration of B abstaining from taking criminal proceeding against A with respect
         to an offence which is compoundable, the agreement is not opposed to public policy.
         But, it is otherwise, if the offence is uncompoundable.

(3) Maintenance and Champerty: Maintenance is an agreement in which a person
         promises to maintain suit in which he has no interest.

         Example 39: A offer B ` 2000, if he sues C for a case which they could have settled
         mutually under provisions of law, just to annoy C. Such agreement is maintenance
         agreement.

         Champerty is an agreement in which a person agrees to assist another in litigation in-
         exchange of a promise to hand over a portion of the proceeds of the action.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.76  BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 40: A agrees to pay expenses to B if he sues C and B agrees to pay half of
         the amount received from result of such suit. This is an agreement of champerty. The
         agreement for supplying funds by way of Maintenance or Champerty is valid unless

         (a) It is unreasonable so as to be unjust to other party or

         (b) It is made by a malicious motive like that of gambling in litigation or
                   oppressing other party by encouraging unrighteous suits and not with the
                   bonafide object of assisting a claim believed to be just.

(4) Trafficking relating to Public Offices and titles: An agreement to trafficking in
         public office is opposed to public policy, as it interferes with the appointment of a
         person best qualified for the service of the public. Public policy requires that there
         should be no money consideration for the appointment to an office in which the
         public is interested. The following are the examples of agreements that are void;
         since they are tantamount to sale of public offices.

         (1) An agreement to pay money to a public servant in order to induce him to
                   retire from his office so that another person may secure the appointment is
                   void.

         (2) An agreement to procure a public recognition like Padma Vibhushan for
                   reward is void.

         Example 41: Harish paid ` 15000 to the officer to give his son the job in the Forest
         department of India. On failure by officer he couldn't recover the amount as such
         contract amounts to trafficking in public office which is opposed to public policy.

(5) Agreements tending to create monopolies: Agreements having for their object the
         establishment of monopolies are opposed to public policy and therefore void.

         Example 42: XYZ and ABC were only the manufactures of oxygen cylinders in West
         Bengal. They both entered into contract of supplying the same at very high rates and
         enjoy the monopoly rates during the covid period in the country. Such contract is
         opposed to public policy as they intended to create monopolies.

(6) Marriage brokerage agreements: An agreement to negotiate marriage for reward,
         which is known as a marriage brokerage contract, is void, as it is opposed to public
         policy. For instance, an agreement to pay money to a person hired to procure a wife
         is opposed to public policy and therefore void.

         Note: Marriage bureau only provides information and doesn't negotiate marriage for
         reward, therefore, it is not covered under this point.

(7) Interference with the course of justice: An agreement whose object is to induce
         any judicial officer of the State to act partially or corruptly is void, as it is opposed to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.77

         public policy; so also is an agreement by A to reward B, who is an intended witness in
         a suit against A in consideration of B's absenting himself from the trial. For the same
         reasons, an agreement which contemplates the use of under-hand means to
         influence legislation is void.

(8) Interest against obligation: The following are examples of agreement that are void
         as they tend to create an interest against obligation. The object of such agreements
         is opposed to public policy.

         (1) An agreement by an agent to receive without his principal's consent
                   compensation from another for the performance of his agency is invalid.

         (2) A, who is the manager of a firm, agrees to pass a contract to X if X pays to A `
                   200,000 privately; the agreement is void.

(9) Consideration Unlawful in Part: By virtue of Section 24, if any part of a single
         consideration for one or more objects, or any one or any part of any one of several
         considerations for a single object, is unlawful, the agreement is void."

         This section is an obvious consequence of the general principle of Section 23. There
         is no promise for a lawful consideration if there is anything illegal in a consideration
         which must be taken as a whole. The general rule is that where the legal part of a
         contract can be severed from the illegal part, the bad part may be rejected and the
         good one can be retained. But where the illegal part cannot be severed, the contract
         is altogether void.

3.5 VOID AGREEMENTS

              Expressly declared Void Agreements

1. Made by incompetent parties 6. Agreement in restraint of marriage

(Section 11)                                       (Section 26)

2. Agreements made under Bilateral 7. Agreements in restraint of trade

mistake of fact (Section 20)                       (Section 27)

3. Agreements the consideration or 8. Agreement in restraint of legal

object of which is unlawful (Section               proceedings (Section 28)

23)

4. Agreement the consideration or 9. Agreement the meaning of which is

object of which is unlawful in parts               uncertain (Section 29)

(Section 24)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.78                  BUSINESS LAWS

5. Agreements   made        without 10. Wagering Agreement (Section 30)

consideration (Section 25)                11. Agreements to do impossible Acts
                                                 (Section 56)
[Refer Unit 2]

(1) Agreement in restraint of marriage (Section 26): Every agreement in restraint of
         marriage of any person other than a minor, is void. So, if a person, being a major,
         agrees for good consideration not to marry, the promise is not binding and
         considered as void agreement.

(2) Agreement in restraint of trade (Section 27): An agreement by which any person is
         restrained from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind, is to that
         extent void. But this rule is subject to the following exceptions, namely, where a
         person sells the goodwill of a business and agrees with the buyer to refrain from
         carrying on a similar business, within specified local limits, so long as the buyer or his
         successor in interest carries on a like business therein, such an agreement is valid
         (goodwill is the advantage enjoyed by a business on account of public patronage and
         encouragement from habitual customers). The local limits within which the seller of
         the goodwill agrees not to carry on similar business must be reasonable. Under
         Section 36 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 if an outgoing partner makes an
         agreement with the continuing partners that he will not carry on any business similar
         to that of the firm within a specified period or within specified local limits, such an
         agreement, thought in restraint of trade, will be valid, if the restrictions imposed are
         reasonable. Similarly, under Section 11 of that Act an agreement between partners
         not to carry on competing business during the continuance of partnership is valid.

         But an agreement of service by which an employee binds himself, during the term of
         his agreement, not to compete with his employer is not in restraint of trade.

         Example 43: B, a physician and surgeon, employs A as an assistant for a term of
         three years and A agrees not to practice as a surgeon and physician during these
         three years. The agreement is valid and A can be restrained by an injunction if he
         starts independent practice during this period.

         Example 44: An agreement by a manufacturer to sell during a certain period his
         entire production to a wholesale merchant is not in restraint of trade.

         Example 45: Agreement among the sellers of a particular commodity not to sell the
         commodity for less than a fixed price to maintain the quality of the product, is not an
         agreement in restraint of trade.

(3) Agreement in restraint of legal proceedings (Section 28): An agreement in
         restraint of legal proceeding is the one by which any party thereto is restricted

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                         2.79

absolutely from enforcing his rights under a contract through a Court or which
abridges the usual period for starting legal proceedings. A contract of this nature is
void.

However, there are certain exceptions to the above rule:

(i) A contract by which the parties agree that any dispute between them in
         respect of any subject shall be referred to arbitration and that only the
         amount awarded in such arbitration shall be recoverable is a valid contract.

(ii) Similarly, a contract by which the parties agree to refer to arbitration any
         question between them which has already arisen or which may arise in future,
         is valid; but such a contract must be in writing.

(4) Agreement - the meaning of which is uncertain (Section 29): An agreement, the
         meaning of which is not certain, is void, but where the meaning thereof is capable of
         being made certain, the agreement is valid.

Example 46: A agrees to sell B "a hundred tons of oil". There is nothing whatever to
show what kind of oil was intended. The agreement is void for uncertainty. But the
agreement would be valid if A was dealer only in coconut oil; because in such a case
its meaning would be capable of being made certain.

(5) Wagering agreement (Section 30): An agreement by way of a wager is void. It is an
         agreement involving payment of a sum of money upon the determination of an
         uncertain event. The essence of a wager is that each side should stand to win or lose,
         depending on the way an uncertain event takes place in reference to which the chance
         is taken and in the occurrence of which neither of the parties has legitimate interest.

Example 47: A agrees to pay ` 50,000 to B if it rains, and B promises to pay a like
amount to A if it does not rain, the agreement will be by way of wager. But if one of
the parties has control over the event, agreement is not a wager.

Essentials of a Wager

1.  There must be a promise to pay money or money's worth.

2.  Promise must be conditional on an event happening or not happening.

3.  There must be uncertainty of event.

4.  There must be two parties, each party must stand to win or lose.

5.  There must be common intention to bet at the timing of making such

    agreement.

6.  Parties should have no interest in the event except for stake.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.80  BUSINESS LAWS

Transactions similar to Wager (Gambling)

(i) Lottery transactions: A lottery is a game of chance and not of skill or knowledge.
         Where the prime motive of participant is gambling, the transaction amounts to a
         wager. Even if the lottery is sanctioned by the Government of India it is a wagering
         transaction. The only effect of such sanction is that the person responsible for
         running the lottery will not be punished under the Indian Penal Code. Lotteries are
         illegal and even collateral transactions to it are tainted with illegality (Section 294A of
         Indian Penal Code).

(ii) Crossword Puzzles and Competitions: Crossword puzzles in which prizes depend
         upon the correspondence of the competitor's solution with a previously prepared
         solution kept with the editor of a newspaper is a lottery and therefore, a wagering
         transaction.

         Case Law: State of Bombay vs. R.M.D. Chamarbangwala AIR (1957)

         Facts: A crossword puzzle was given in magazine. Abovementioned clause was stated
         in the magazine. A solved his crossword puzzle and his solution corresponded with
         previously prepared solution kept with the editor. Held, this was a game of chance
         and therefore a lottery (wagering transaction).

         Crossword puzzles, picture competitions and athletic competitions where prizes are
         awarded on the basis of skill and intelligence are the games of skill and hence such
         competitions are valid. According to the Prize Competition Act, 1955 prize
         competitions in games of skill are not wagers provided the prize money does not
         exceed ` 1,000.

(iii) Speculative transactions: an agreement or a share market transaction where the
         parties intend to settle the difference between the contract price and the market
         price of certain goods or shares on a specified day, is a gambling and hence void.

(iv) Horse Race Transactions: A horse race competition where prize payable to the bet
         winner is less than ` 500, is a wager.

         Example 48: A and B enter into an agreement in which A promises to pay ` 2,00,000
         provided `Chetak' wins the horse race competition. This is not a wagering transaction.

         However, Section 30 is not applicable in an agreement to contribute toward plate,
         prize or sum of money of the value of ` 500 or above to be awarded to the winner of
         a horse race.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                             2.81

Transactions resembling with wagering transaction but are not void

(i) Chit fund: Chit fund does not come within the scope of wager (Section 30). In case
         of a chit fund, a certain number of persons decide to contribute a fixed sum for a
         specified period and at the end of a month, the amount so contributed is paid to the
         lucky winner of the lucky draw.

(ii) Commercial transactions or share market transactions: In these transactions in
         which delivery of goods or shares is intended to be given or taken, do not amount to
         wagers.

(iii) Games of skill and Athletic Competition: Crossword puzzles, picture competitions
         and athletic competitions where prizes are awarded on the basis of skill and
         intelligence are the games of skill and hence such competition are valid. According to
         the Prize Competition Act, 1955 prize competition in games of skill are not wagers
         provided the prize money does not exceed ` 1,000.

(iv) A contract of insurance: A contract of insurance is a type of contingent contract and
         is valid under law and these contracts are different from wagering agreements.

Distinction between Contract of Insurance and Wagering Agreement

Basis              Contracts of Insurance Wagering Agreement

1. Meaning         It is a contract                to It is a promise to pay money or
                   indemnify the loss.                  money's worth on the
                                                        happening or non- happening
                                                        of an uncertain event.

2. Consideration   The crux of insurance                         There is no consideration
                                                                 between the two parties. There
                   contract is the mutual                        is just gambling for money.

                   consideration (premium

                   and                             compensation

                   amount).

3. Insurable       Insured party has                             There is no property in case of
     Interest      insurable interest in the                     wagering agreement.
                   life or property sought to
                   be insured.                                   There is betting on other's life
                                                                 and properties.

4. Contract        of Except life insurance, the Loser has to pay the fixed
     Indemnity           contract of insurance amount on the happening of
                         indemnifies the insured uncertain event.
                         person against loss.

5. Enforceability  It is valid                     and It is void and unenforceable
                   enforceable                             agreement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.82               BUSINESS LAWS

6. Premium         Calculation of premium          No such logical calculations are
7. Public Welfare  is based on scientific and      required in case of wagering
                   actuarial calculation of        agreement.
                   risks.

                   They are beneficial to the They have been regarded as

                   society.                        against the public welfare.

SUMMARY

The following persons are incompetent to contract: (a) minor, (b) persons of unsound mind,
(c) other disqualified persons.

(a) Minor: Agreement with a minor is altogether void but his property is liable for
         necessaries supplied to him. He cannot be a partner but can be admitted to benefits
         of partnership with the consent of all partners. He can always plead minority and
         cannot be asked to compensate for any benefit received under a void agreement.
         Under certain circumstances, a guardian can enter into valid contract on behalf of
         minor. Minor cannot ratify a contract on attaining majority.

(b) Persons of unsound mind: Persons of unsound mind such as idiots, lunatics and
         drunker cannot enter into a contract, but a lunatic can enter into a valid contract
         when he is in a sound state of mind. The liability for necessities of life supplied to
         persons of unsound mind is the same as in case of minors. (Section 68).

(c) Certain other persons are disqualified due to their status.

Free Consent

Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon the same thing in the same
sense (Section 13). Consent is free when it is not caused by mistake, misrepresentation, undue
influence, fraud or coercion. When consent is caused by any of above said elements, the
contract is voidable at the option of the party whose consent was so caused (Sections 19 and
19A)

(a) Coercion: Coercion is the committing or threatening to commit any act, forbidden by
         the Indian Penal Code or the unlawful detaining or threatening to detain, any
         property, to the prejudice of any person with the intention of causing any person to
         enter into an agreement (Section 15). A contract induced by coercion is voidable at
         the option of the aggrieved party.

(b) Undue influence: When one party to a contract is able to dominate the will of the
         other and uses the position to obtain an unfair advantage, the contract is said to be
         induced by undue influence. (Section 16). Such contract is voidable, not void.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                                                      2.83

(c) Fraud: Fraud exists when a false representation has been made knowingly with an
         intention to deceive the other party, or to induce him to enter a contract (Section 17).
         Contract in the case is voidable.

(d) Misrepresentation: Means a misstatement of a material fact made believing it to be
         true, without an intent to deceive the other party (Section 18). Contract will be
         voidable in this case.

(e) Mistake: When both the parties are at a mistake to a matter of fact to the
         agreement, the agreement is altogether void.

Lawful Object and Consideration

An agreement where the object or the consideration is unlawful, is void. Object or
consideration is unlawful if it is forbidden by law, it defeats the provisions of law; or is
fraudulent, or involves injury to the person or property of another; or is immoral; or is
opposed to public policy.

Besides the above said agreements, certain agreements have been expressly declared to be

void by the Contract Act such as - wagering agreements, agreement with uncertain

meaning, agreements where consideration is unlawful in part etc.

Minor: Sec.3 Indian Majority Act, 1875: Minor who is                               1. Contract with person
under 18 years.                                                                    of unsound mind is
                                                                                   void.
                  Position of a contract with Minor                                2. Person usually
                                                                                   Unsound. sometimes
1.Agreement with or by minor is                    10. Minor can be an agent       sound - can contract
void-ab-initio agreement                           without incurring any           when sound.
                                                   personal liability.             3. Person usually sound.
2. Cannot be ratified on attaining                                                 sometimes unsound -
majority.                                          11. Parents/guardians are       cannot contract when
                                                   not liable for the contract     unsound.
3.Minor can be a beneficiary or can                entered into by him.
take benefit out of a contract.                                                      Disqualified by Law
                                                   12. In case of joint contract   1. Foreign sovereigns
4.Minor can always plead minority.                 by adult and minor, only        (Rulers)
                                                   adult is liable.                2. Alien Enemy
5.Minor's estate is liable for                                                     3. Corporations
necessaries.                                       13. If adult is surety for      4. Convicts.
                                                   minor, adult is liable as
6.Minor is personally liable for                   direct contract between
contracts for his benefit or supply of             adult and third party.
necessaries entered by guardian
within scope of authority.                         14. Shares cannot be
                                                   allotted to minor but minor
7. No specific performance can be                  can become a shareholder
claimed.                                           by transfer or transmission
                                                   of fully paid shares to him.
8. Minor cannot be adjusted
insolvent.                                         15. Minor is Liable for torts.

9.Minor cannot enter into partnership.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                 2.84          BUSINESS LAWS

                           CONSENT & FREE CONSENT

Consent: "Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon the same
thing in the same sense." (Consensus-ad-idem). When there is no consent, there is no
contract.

Free Consent (Sec.14): Consent is said to be free when it is not caused by

   Coercion      Undue Influence                           Fraud (Sec. 17)               Mis-       Mistake (Sec.
    (Sec. 15)         (Sec. 16)                    (i) Knowingly make a false    representation     20 to Sec.22)
                                                   suggestion.
(i) Committing   One party is in the                                                  (Sec. 18)     Mistake of
or threatening                                     (ii) Active concealment of a                     Law
to commit any    position      to                  fact                          (i) False
act forbidden                                                                    statement but      (i) Mistake of
by IPC           dominate the will                 (iii) Promise without any     maker believes it  law of the
                                                   intention of performance.     to be true.        country-
(ii) Unlawful    of other and it
detaining or                                       (iv) Any other act fitted to  (ii) Breach of     Contract is
threatening to   takes      unfair                 deceive.                      duty without       not voidable.
detain any                                                                       any intention to
property.        advantages of                     (v) Act or omission           deceive.           (ii) Mistake of
                                                   declared by law as fraud.                        law of a
Consequences     relation.                                                       (iii) Mis-         foreign
                                                   Essentials                    representation     country-
(i) Voidable at  Consequences                      (i) The representation must   even made          Contract is
the option of                                      be false.                     innocently, the    void.
party whose      (i) Voidable at the                                             other party has
consent was      option of party                   (ii) Misrepresentation must   actually acted.    Mistake of
so caused.                                         be made willfully.                               Fact
                 whose consent                                                   Consequences
(ii) Person to   was so caused.                    (iii) Misrepresentation must                     (i) Bilateral
whom money                                         be made with intention to     Party can          Mistake-
is paid or       (ii) Such contract                deceive the other party.
thing            may be set aside                                                · rescind the      Contract is
delivered        either absolutely                 (iv) The other party is       contract.          void if-
under            or if the party                   actually deceived.
coercion must                                                                    · insist for       mistakes
repay or         who is entitled to                (v) The other party has       genuine            relates to
return it.                                         suffered a loss.              performance.       material fact;
                 avoid it has
Burden of                                          Note. Silence amounts to                         both parties
Proof            received      any                 fraud where:                                     are under
                                                   (i)There is a duty to speak.                     mistake.
Lies on the      benefit
aggrieved                                          (ii) His silence is speech.                      (ii) Unilateral
party            thereunder, upon                                                                   Mistake-
                                                   Consequences                                     Contract is
Note: Threat     such terms and                    Party can                                        neither void
to commit                                                                                           nor voidable
suicide is       conditions as to                  · rescind the contract.
coercion
                 the court may                     · insist for genuine
                                                   performance.
                 seem just and
                 equitable.                        · sue for damages.

                 Burden of Proof                   Note: ·If party takes any
                                                   benefit, contract is not
                 Firstly, Lies on the              voidable.
                 aggrieved party
                 after that other
                 party has to prove
                 that no undue
                 influence.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                          2.85

               UNLAWFUL OBJECT AND CONSIDERATION (Sec.23)

        If          When       When it is               When           When           When
consideration  consideration   fraudulent          consideration  consideration  consideration

   or object    or object is                          involves      is immoral    is opposed
forbidden by      of such a                           injury to                     to public
               nature that if                        person or
       law      permitted it                        property of                       policy
                                                      another
                    would
                   defeats
               provisions of

                      law

Agreements of trading with Trafficking relating to Public Interference with the course

enemy                          Offices & titles.                  of justice

Agreement of   stifling Agreements tending to Interest against obligation
prosecution                create monopolies

Maintenance & champerty        Marriage            brokerage Consideration unlawful in
                               agreements                           part

                               VOID AGREEMENTS

Made by Incompetent Parties(S.11) Without consideration (S.25) With uncertain meaning
                                                                                                (S.29)

Under a mutual mistake of fact In restraint of marriage (S.26) Wagering Agreements (S.30)
(S.20)

Unlawful consideration or object In restraint of trade (S.27)         To do impossible act (S.56)
(S.23)

Unlawful consideration or object in In restraint of            legal

part(S.24)                     proceedings (S.28)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          2.86             BUSINESS LAWS

                           WAGERING AGREEMENT (SEC. 30)

Meaning:  Agreement                         Essentials             Transactions are not Wager
                           (i) Promises to pay money
between two parties by     (ii) Uncertain event                 (i) Chit Fund
                           (iii)Mutual Chances of win or lose.
which one promises to      (iv)No control over the event        (ii) Share market transactions in
                           (v) No other interest in the event.      which delivery of stocks and
pay money or money's                                                shares in intended to be given
                                               Effects              & taken.
worth on the happening     (i) Agreement is void
                                                                (iii)Game of skill, crossword, etc.
of same uncertain event
                                                                (iv)a contribution toward any prize
in consideration of the                                             value of Rs. 500 or above to
                                                                    the awarded to the winner or
other party's promises to                                           winners of a horse race.

pay if the event does not                                       (v) A contract of insurance.

happen.

                           (ii) No suit to recover amount won.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Ordinarily, a minor's agreement is
         (a) Void ab initio
         (b) Voidable
         (c) Valid
         (d) Unlawful

2. Consent is not said to be free when it is caused by
         (a) Coercion
         (b) Undue influence
         (c) Fraud
         (d) All of these

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.87

3. When the consent of a party is obtained by fraud, the contract is;
         (a) Void
         (b) Voidable
         (c) Valid
         (d) Illegal

4. The threat to commit suicide amounts to
         (a) Coercion
         (b) Undue influence
         (c) Misrepresentation
         (d) Fraud

5. Moral pressure is involved in the case of
         (a) Coercion
         (b) Undue Influence
         (c) Misrepresentation
         (d) Fraud

6. A wrong representation when made without any intention to deceive the other party
         amounts to
         (a) Coercion
         (b) Undue influence
         (c) Misrepresentation
         (d) Fraud

7. Which of the following statement is true?
         (a) A threat to commit suicide does not amount to coercion
         (b) Undue influence involves use of physical pressure
         (c) Ignorance of law is no excuse
         (d) Silence always amounts to fraud

8. In case of illegal agreement, the collateral agreements are:
         (a) Valid
         (b) Void

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.88  BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) Voidable
         (d) Any of these
9. An agreement the object or consideration of which is unlawful, is
         (a) Void
         (b) Valid
         (c) Voidable
         (d) Contingent
10. An agreement is void if it is opposed to public policy. Which of the following is not
         covered by heads of public policy?
         (a) Trading with an enemy
         (b) Trafficking in public offices
         (c) Marriage brokerage contracts
         (d) Contracts to do impossible acts.
11. A paid ` 5000 to a Government servant to get him a contract for the canteen. The
         Government servant could not get the contract. Can A recover ` 5000 paid by him to
         the Government servant?
         (a) Yes, the agreement is opposed to public policy
         (b) No, the agreement is opposed to public policy
         (c) No, the agreements are a voidable agreement and can be avoided by A
         (d) No, the agreement falls under section 23 and hence illegal
12. With regard to the contractual capacity of a person of unsound mind, which one of the
         following statements is most appropriate?
         (a) A person of unsound mind can never enter into a contract
         (b) A person of unsound mind can enter into a contract
         (c) A person who is usually of unsound mind can contract when he is, at the time of

                   entering into a contract, of sound mind
         (d) A person who is occasionally of unsound mind can contract although at the

                   time of making the contract, he is of unsound mind

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.89

13. An agreement made under mistake of fact, by both the parties, forming the essential
         subject matter of the agreement is:
         (a) Void
         (b) Voidable
         (c) Valid
         (d) Unenforceable

14. A is in dire need of ` 1,00,000 but was unable to get any loan from banks as he had no
         security to offer. A approached his friend B who knowing the helpless position of A lent
         money at a very high rate of interest, saying that he had himself borrowed money from
         C. The contract is:
         (a) Vitiated by undue influence that B had exercised over A due to his close
                   friendship.
         (b) Void as the rate of interest being very high was unconscionable.
         (c) Not valid as B had wrongly misled A that he had borrowed money from C.
         (d) Valid as a friend could not be supposed to have wielded undue influence only
                   because the money lent carried higher rate of interest.

15. Which of the following is not an exception to the rule that the agreement in restraint of
         trade is void:
         (a) A partner can be prevented for carrying on similar business
         (b) An outgoing partner can be restrained on carrying similar business
         (c) On dissolution of firm, partners may agree not to carry on similar business
         (d) The seller of goodwill of business can be prevented for carrying any kind of
                   business at any place.

16. An agreement to pay money or money's worth on the happening or non-happening of
         a specified uncertain event, is a
         (a) Wagering agreement
         (b) Contingent contract
         (c) Quasi contract
         (d) Uncertain agreement

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.90  BUSINESS LAWS

17. A wagering agreement in India is declared by the Contract Act as
         (a) Illegal and void
         (b) Void but not illegal
         (c) Voidable at the option of the aggrieved party
         (d) Immoral

18. An agreement, the object of which is to procure a public post, is
         (a) Void
         (b) Voidable
         (c) Valid
         (d) Defective

19. While obtaining the consent of the promise, keeping silence by the promisor when he
         has a duty to speak about the material facts, amounts to consent obtained by:
         (a) Coercion
         (b) Misrepresentation
         (c) Mistake
         (d) Fraud

20. A enters into an agreement with B who has robbed A of ` 10,000 to drop prosecution
         against him in consideration of B's returning ` 8,000. Afterwards B refused to pay. A
         can get from B
         (a) ` 8,000
         (b) ` 100
         (c) Nothing
         (d) ` 10,000 plus damages

21. On attaining the age of majority, a minor's agreement:
         (a) cannot be ratified by him
         (b) becomes valid
         (c) can be ratified by him
         (d) becomes void

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.91

22. A threat to kidnap one's son in consideration of ` 5,00,000 is void because of:
         (a) inadequacy of consideration
         (b) incompetence of parties
         (c) absence of free consent
         (d) all of the above

23. In which of the following case, aggrieved part can sue for damages:
         (a) Fraud
         (b) mistake
         (c) undue influence
         (d) misrepresentation

24. A mere attempt to deceive a party to a contract:
         (a) is fraud even though the party is not deceived
         (b) is not fraud unless the party is actually deceived
         (c) amounts to coercion
         (d) amounts to misrepresentation

Descriptive Questions

1. "An agreement, the meaning of which is not certain, is void". Discuss.
2. "Though a minor is not competent to contract, nothing in the Contract Act prevents

         him from making the other party bound to the minor". Discuss.
3. A student was induced by his teacher to sell his brand new car to the later at less than

         the purchase price to secure more marks in the examination. Accordingly, the car was
         sold. However, the father of the student persuaded him to sue his teacher. State
         whether the student can sue the teacher?
4. Explain the concept of `misrepresentation' in matters of contract. Sohan induced Suraj
         to buy his motorcycle saying that it was in a very good condition. After taking the
         motorcycle, Suraj complained that there were many defects in the motorcycle. Sohan
         proposed to get it repaired and promised to pay 40% cost of repairs. After few days, the
         motorcycle did not work at all. Now Suraj wants to rescind the contract. Decide giving
         reasons whether Suraj can rescind the contract?
5. Mr. SAMANT owned a motor car. He approached Mr. CHHOTU and offered to sell his
         motor car for ` 3,00,000. Mr. SAMANT told Mr. CHHOTU that the motor car is running

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.92  BUSINESS LAWS

         at the rate of 30 KMs per litre of petrol. Both the fuel meter and the speed meter of the
         car were working perfectly. Mr. CHHOTU agreed with the proposal of Mr. SAMANT and
         took delivery of the car by paying ` 3,00,000/- to Mr. SAMANT. After 10 days, Mr.
         CHHOTU came back with the car and stated that the claim made by Mr. SAMANT
         regarding fuel efficiency was not correct and therefore there was a case of
         misrepresentation. Referring to the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, decide
         and write whether Mr. CHHOTU can rescind the contract in the above ground.

6. Ishaan, aged 16 years, was studying in an engineering college. On 1st March, 2018 he
         took a loan of ` 2 lakhs from Vishal for the payment of his college fee and agreed to
         pay by 30th May, 2019. Ishaan possesses assets worth ` 15 lakhs. On due date Ishaan
         fails to pay back the loan to Vishal. Vishal now wants to recover the loan from Ishaan
         out of his assets. Decide whether Vishal would succeed referring to the provisions of the
         Indian Contract Act, 1872.

ANSWER/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

    1. (a) 2. (d) 3. (b) 4. (a) 5. (b) 6. (c)

    7. (c) 8. (b) 9. (a) 10. (d) 11. (d) 12. (c)

   13. (a) 14. (d) 15. (d) 16. (a) 17. (b) 18. (a)

   19. (d) 20. (c) 21. (a) 22. (c) 23. (a) 24. (b)

Answers to the Descriptive Questions

1. Agreement - the meaning of which is uncertain (Section 29): An agreement, the
         meaning of which is not certain, is void, but where the meaning thereof is capable of
         being made certain, the agreement is valid. For example, A agrees to sell B "a
         hundred tons of oil". There is nothing whatever to show what kind of oil was
         intended. The agreement is void for uncertainty. But the agreement would be valid if
         A was dealer only in coconut oil; because in such a case its meaning would be
         capable of being made certain.

2. Minor can be a beneficiary or can take benefit out of a contract: Though a minor
         is not competent to contract, nothing in the Contract Act prevents him from making
         the other party bound to the minor. Thus, a promissory note duly executed in favour

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                  2.93

of a minor is not void and can be sued upon by him, because he though incompetent
to contract, may yet accept a benefit.

A minor cannot become partner in a partnership firm. However, he may with the
consent of all the partners, be admitted to the benefits of partnership (Section 30 of
the Indian Partnership Act, 1932).

Example: A mortgage was executed in favour of a minor. Held, he can get a decree
for the enforcement of the mortgage.

3. Yes, A can sue his teacher on the ground of undue influence under the provisions of
         Indian Contract Act, 1872.

According to section 16 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, "A contract is said to be
induced by `undue influence' where the relations subsisting between the parties are
such that one of the parties is in a position to dominate the will of the other and he
uses that position to obtain an unfair advantage over the other".

A person is deemed to be in position to dominate the will of another:

(a) Where he holds a real or apparent authority over the other; or

(b) Where he stands in a fiduciary relationship to the other; or

(c) Where he makes a contract with a person whose mental capacity is
         temporarily or permanently affected by reason of age, illness or mental or
         bodily distress for example, an old illiterate person.

A contract brought as a result of coercion, undue influence, fraud or
misrepresentation would be voidable at the option of the person whose consent was
caused.

4. Misrepresentation: According to Section 18 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872,
         misrepresentation is:

1.  When a person positively asserts that a fact is true when his information does

    not warrant it to be so, though he believes it to be true.

2.  When there is any breach of duty by a person, which brings an advantage to

    the person committing it by misleading another to his prejudice.

3.  When a party causes, however, innocently, the other party to the agreement

    to make a mistake as to the substance of the thing which is the subject of the

    agreement.

The aggrieved party, in case of misrepresentation by the other party, can avoid or
rescind the contract [Section 19, Indian Contract Act, 1872]. The aggrieved party

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.94  BUSINESS LAWS

         loses the right to rescind the contract if he, after becoming aware of the
         misrepresentation, takes a benefit under the contract or in some way affirms it.

         Accordingly, in the given case, Suraj could not rescind the contract, as his acceptance
         to the offer of Sohan to bear 40% of the cost of repairs impliedly amount to final
         acceptance of the sale.

5. As per the provisions of Section 19 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, when consent to
         an agreement is caused by coercion, fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a
         contract voidable at the option of the party whose consent was so caused.

         A party to contract, whose consent was caused by fraud or misrepresentation, may, if
         he thinks fit, insist that the contract shall be performed, and that he shall be put in
         the position in which he would have been if the representations made had been true.

         Exception: If such consent was caused by misrepresentation or by silence, fraudulent
         within the meaning of section 18, the contract, nevertheless, is not voidable if the
         party whose consent was so caused had the means of discovering the truth with
         ordinary diligence.

         In the situation given in the question, both the fuel meter and the speed meter of the
         car were working perfectly, Mr. CHHOTU had the means of discovering the truth with
         ordinary diligence. Therefore, the contract is not voidable. Hence, Mr. CHHOTU
         cannot rescind the contract in the above ground.

6. According to Section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, every person is competent
         to contract who is of the age of majority according to the law to which he is subject,
         and who is of sound mind and is not disqualified from contracting by any law to
         which he is subject.

         A person who has completed the age of 18 years is a major and otherwise he will be
         treated as minor. Thus, Ishaan who is a minor is incompetent to contract and any
         agreement with him is void [Mohori Bibi Vs Dharmo Das Ghose 1903].

         Section 68 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 however, prescribes the liability of a
         minor for the supply of the things which are the necessaries of life to him. It says
         that though minor is not personally liable to pay the price of necessaries supplied to
         him or money lent for the purpose, the supplier or lender will be entitled to claim the
         money/price of goods or services which are necessaries suited to his condition of life
         provided that the minor has a property. The liability of minor is only to the extent of
         the minor's property. Thus, according to the above provision, Vishal will be entitled
         to recover the amount of loan given to Ishaan for payment of the college fees from
         the property of the minor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
