CHAPTER  2

THE         INDIAN

CONTRACT    ACT,

1872

             UNIT ­ 1: NATURE OF CONTRACTS

                                               LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:
 The meaning of the terms `agreement' and `contract' and note the

       distinction between the two.
 The essential elements of a contract.
 About various types of contract.
 The concept of offer and acceptance and rules of communication

       and revocation thereof.
          2.2                          BUSINESS LAWS

UNIT OVERVIEW                                      Elements of        Contract      Types of
                                                     Contract                       Contracts
                                Offer                              Essentials of a
                                                                   valid Contract

                                       Agreement Enforceability

                                                                Acceptance

 Legal    Kinds of  Essentials         Commun         Legal Rules  Communica
Rules of    offer      of a            ication of      of a valid     tion of
 a valid                                              acceptance
                    proposal              offer                    acceptance
  offer

Contract Law before Indian Contract Act, 1872

To understand the Contract Law before the Indian Contract Act, 1872, we should understand
the journey of contract law during different time periods. In the ancient and medieval time,
there was no specific law for contracts. For this purpose, generally, different sources of Hindu
law like; Vedas, Dharam shastras, Smritis, Shrutis etc. were referred which gave a vivid
description of the law similar to contracts in those times. During the period of Mauryas,
contracts were in the form of "bilateral transactions" which were based on free consent on all
the terms and conditions involved.

During the Mughal rule in India, contracts were governed by Mohammedan Law of Contract.
In this law, the Arabic word `Aqd' is known for contract which means a conjunction. In the
same way, word `Ijab' was used for proposal and `Qabul' was used for acceptance. The
formation of a contract according to Islamic law does not require any kind of formality; the
only requirement is the express consent of both parties on the same thing in the same sense.

Hindu law is basically different from that of English law. Hindu law is actually the compilation
of numerous customs and works of Smritikaras, who interpreted and analysed Vedas to
develop the various aspect of Hindu law. According to Hindu law, minor, intoxicated person,
old man or handicapped cannot enter into a valid contract. According to Narada smriti,
someone of age upto 8 years is considered as an infant. Age from 8 years to 16 years is
considered as boyhood and after 16 years the person is competent to enter into a contract.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.3

During British period; before the advent of the Indian Contract Act, the English Law was
applied in the Presidency Towns of Madras, Bombay and Calcutta under the Charter of 1726
issued by king George to the East India Company. If one of the parties of contract is from
either of the religion and other is from other religion then the law of the defendant is to be
used. This was followed in the presidency towns, but in cities outside the presidency towns,
the matters were solved on the basis of justice, equity and good conscience. This procedure
was followed till the Indian Contract Act was implemented in India.

The Law of contract: Introduction

The Law of Contract constitutes the most important branch of mercantile or commercial law.
It affects everybody, more so, trade, commerce and industry. It may be said that the contract
is the foundation of the civilized world. The law relating to contract is governed by the Indian
Contract Act, 1872. It was formed on April 25, 1872 and came into force on September 01,
1872. The preamble to the Act says that it is an Act "to define and amend certain parts of the
law relating to contract". It extends to the whole of India including the state of Jammu and
Kashmir after removal of Article ­ 370 of Indian Constitution.

The Act mostly deals with the general principles and rules governing contracts. The Act is
divisible into two parts. The first part (Section 1-75) deals with the general principles of the
law of contract, and therefore applies to all contracts irrespective of their nature. The second
part (Sections 124-238) deals with certain special kinds of contracts, e.g., Indemnity and
guarantee, bailment, pledge, and agency.

As a result of increasing complexities of business environment,
innumerable contracts are entered into by the parties in the usual
course of carrying on their business. `Contract' is the most usual
method of defining the rights and duties in a business
transaction. This branch of law is different from other branches
of law in a very important aspect. It does not prescribe so many rights and duties, which the
law will protect or enforce; instead it contains a number of limiting principles subject to which
the parties may create rights and duties for themselves. The Indian Contract Act, 1872 codifies
the legal principles that govern `contracts'. The Act basically identifies the ingredients of a
legally enforceable valid contract in addition to dealing with certain special type of contractual
relationships like indemnity, guarantee, bailment, pledge, quasi contracts, contingent
contracts etc. It basically defines the circumstances in which promises made by the parties to
a contract shall be legally binding on them.

This unit refers to the essentials of a legally enforceable agreement or contract. It sets out
rules for the offer and acceptance and revocation thereof. It states the circumstances when an
agreement is voidable or enforceable by one party only, and when the agreements are void,
i.e. not enforceable at all.
2.4  BUSINESS LAWS

    1.1 WHAT IS A CONTRACT?

The term contract is defined under section 2(h) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 as-

"an agreement enforceable by law".
The contract consists of two essential elements:
(i) an agreement, and
(ii) its enforceability by law.

         (i) Agreement - The term `agreement' given in Section 2(e) of the Act is defined
                   as- "every promise and every set of promises, forming the consideration for
                   each other".
                   To have an insight into the definition of agreement, we need to understand
                   promise.
                   Section 2 (b) defines promise as- "when the person to whom the proposal is
                   made signifies his assent there to, the proposal is said to be accepted. Proposal
                   when accepted, becomes a promise".
                   The following points emerge from the above definition:
                   1. when the person to whom the proposal is made
                   2. signifies his assent on that proposal which is made to him
                   3. the proposal becomes accepted
                   4. accepted proposal becomes promise

                   Thus, we say that an agreement is the result of the proposal made by one party
                   to the other party and that other party gives his acceptance thereto of course
                   for mutual consideration.

                   Agreement = Offer/Proposal + Acceptance + Consideration

         (ii) Enforceability by law ­ An agreement to become a contract must give rise to
                   a legal obligation which means a duly enforceable by law.

         Thus, from above definitions it can be concluded that ­

Contract = Agreement + Enforceability by law

On elaborating the above two concepts, it is obvious that contract comprises of an agreement
which is a promise or a set of reciprocal promises, that a promise is the acceptance of a
proposal giving rise to a binding contract. Further, section 2(h) requires an agreement capable
of being enforceable by law before it is called `contract'. Where parties have made a binding
contract, they created rights and obligations between themselves.
             THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872            2.5

Example 1: A agrees with B to sell car for ` 2 lacs to B. Here A is under an obligation to give
car to B and B has the right to receive the car on payment of ` 2 lacs and also B is under an
obligation to pay ` 2 lacs to A and A has a right to receive ` 2 lacs.

Example 2: Father promises his son to pay him pocket allowance of Rs. 500 every month. But
he refuses to pay later. The son cannot recover the same in court of law as this is a social
agreement. This is not created with an intention to create legal relationship and hence it is
not a contract.

So, Law of Contract deals with only such legal obligations which has resulted from
agreements. Such obligation must be contractual in nature. However, some obligations are
outside the purview of the law of contract.

Example 3: An obligation to maintain wife and children, an order of the court of law etc. These
are status obligations and so out of the scope of the Contract Act.

Difference between Agreement and Contract

Basis of differences  Agreement                       Contract
Meaning
                      Every promise and every set    Agreement enforceable by law.
Scope                 of promises, forming the       (Agreement + Legal enforceability)
Legal obligation      consideration for each other.

Nature                (Promise + Consideration)

                      It's a wider term including It is used in a narrow sense with the

                      both legal and social specification that contract is only

                      agreement.                     legally enforceable agreement.

                      It may not create legal        Necessarily creates a legal
                      obligation. An agreement       obligation. A contract always
                      does not always grant rights   grants certain rights to every party.
                      to the parties

                      All agreement are not All contracts are agreements.
                      contracts.

1.2 ESSENTIALS OF A VALID CONTRACT

                      Essentials of a valid contract

As given by Section 10 of Indian  Not given by Section 10 but are also
Contract Act, 1872                considered essential

1 Agreement                       1 Two parties

2 Free consent                    2 Intention to create legal relationship
2.6                     BUSINESS LAWS

3 Competency of the parties            3 Fulfilments of legal formalities

4 Lawful consideration                 4 Certainty of meaning

5 Legal object                         5 Possibility of performance

6 Not expressly declared to be void [as per 6 -
     Section 24 to 30 and 56]

In terms of Section 10 of the Act, "all agreements are contracts if they are made by the
free consent of the parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a
lawful object and are not expressly declared to be void".

Since section 10 is not complete and exhaustive, so there are certain other sections which also
contains requirements for an agreement to be enforceable. Thus, in order to create a valid
contract, the following elements should be present:

1. Two Parties: One cannot contract with himself. A contract involves at least two parties-
         one party making the offer and the other party accepting it. A contract may be made
         by natural persons and by other persons having legal existence e.g. companies,
         universities etc. It is necessary to remember that identity of the parties be
         ascertainable.

Example 4: To constitute a contract of sale, there must be two parties- seller and
buyer. The seller and buyer must be two different persons, because a person cannot
buy his own goods.

         In State of Gujarat vs. Ramanlal S & Co. when on dissolution of a partnership, the
         assets of the firm were divided among the partners, the sales tax officer wanted to tax
         this transaction. It was held that it was not a sale. The partners being joint owner of
         those assets cannot be both buyer and seller.

2. Parties must intend to create legal obligations: There must be an intention on the
         part of the parties to create legal relationship between them. Social or domestic type
         of agreements are not enforceable in court of law and hence they do not result into
         contracts.

         Example 5: A husband agreed to pay to his wife certain amount as maintenance every
         month while he was abroad. Husband failed to pay the promised amount. Wife sued
         him for the recovery of the amount. Here, in this case, wife could not recover as it was
         a social agreement and the parties did not intend to create any legal relations. (Balfour
         v. Balfour)

         Example 6: Mr. Lekhpal promises to pay ` 5 lakhs to his son if the son passes the CA
         exams. On passing the exams, the son claims the money. Here, the son could not
         recover as it was a social agreement.
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.7

    Example 7: A sold goods to B on a condition that he must pay for the amount of goods
    within 30 days. Here A intended to create legal relationship with B. Hence the same is
    contract. On failure by B for making a payment on due date, A can sue him in the court
    of law.

3. Other Formalities to be complied with in certain cases: A contract may be written
         or spoken. As to legal effects, there is no difference between a written contract and
         contract made by word of mouth. But in the interest of the parties the contract must
         be written. In case of certain contracts some other formalities have to be complied with
         to make an agreement legally enforceable.

    For e.g. Contract of Insurance is not valid except as a written contract. Further, in case
    of certain contracts, registration of contract under the laws which is in force at the
    time, is essential for it to be valid, e.g. in the case of immovable property.

    Thus, where there is any statutory requirement that any contract is to be made in
    writing or in the presence of witness, or any law relating to the registration of
    documents must be complied with.

4. Certainty of meaning: The agreement must be certain and not vague or indefinite.

    Example 8: A agrees to sell to B a hundred tons of oil. There is nothing certain in order
    to show what kind of oil was intended for.

    Example 9: XYZ Ltd. agreed to lease the land to Mr. A for indefinite years. The contract
    is not valid as the period of lease is not mentioned.

5. Possibility of performance of an agreement: The terms of agreement should be
         capable of performance. An agreement to do an act impossible in itself cannot be
         enforced.

    Example 10: A agrees with B to discover treasure by magic. The agreement cannot be
    enforced as it is not possible to be performed

Now, according to Section 10 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the following are the essential
elements of a Valid Contract:

I.  Offer and Acceptance or an agreement: An agreement is the first essential element

    of a valid contract. According to Section 2(e) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, "Every

    promise and every set of promises, forming consideration for each other, is an

    agreement" and according to Section 2(b) "A proposal when accepted, becomes a

    promise". An agreement is an outcome of offer and acceptance for consideration.

II. Free Consent: Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon the
         same thing in the same sense. This can also be understood as identity of minds in
         understanding the terms viz consensus ad idem. Further such consent must be free.
2.8  BUSINESS LAWS

         Consent would be considered as free consent if it is not caused by coercion, undue
         influence, fraud, misrepresentation or mistake.

         Example 11: A, who owns two cars is selling red car to B. B thinks he is purchasing the
         black car. There is no consensus ad idem and hence no contract.

         To determine consensus ad idem the language of the contract should be clearly drafted.
         Thus, if A says B "Will you buy my red car for ` 3,00,000?". B says "yes" to it. There is
         said to be consensus ad idem i.e. the meaning is taken in same sense by both the
         parties.

         Example 12: A threatened to shoot B if he (B) does not lend him ` 2,00,000 and B
         agreed to it. Here the agreement is entered into under coercion and hence not a valid
         contract.

         (Students may note that the terms coercion, undue influence, fraud, misrepresentation,
         mistake are explained in the Unit-3)

III. Capacity of the parties: Capacity to contract means the legal ability of a person to
         enter into a valid contract. Section 11 of the Indian Contract Act specifies that every
         person is competent to contract who

         (a) is of the age of majority according to the law to which he is subject and

         (b) is of sound mind and

         (c) is not otherwise disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject.

         A person for being competent to contract must fulfil all the above three qualifications.

         Qualification (a) refers to the age of the contracting person i.e. the person entering
         into contract must be of 18 years of age. Persons below 18 years of age are considered
         minor, therefore, incompetent to contract.

         Qualification (b) requires a person to be of sound mind i.e. he should be in his senses
         so that he understands the implications of the contract at the time of entering into a
         contract. A lunatic, an idiot, a drunken person or under the influence of some
         intoxicant is not supposed to be a person of sound mind.

         Qualification (c) requires that a person entering into a contract should not be
         disqualified by his status, in entering into such contracts. Such persons are an alien
         enemy, foreign sovereigns, convicts etc. They are disqualified unless they fulfil certain
         formalities required by law.

         Contracts entered by persons not competent to contract are not valid.

IV. Consideration: It is referred to as `quid pro quo' i.e. `something in return'. A valuable
         consideration in the sense of law may consist either in some right, interest, profit or
         benefit accruing to one party, or some forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility
         given, suffered or undertaken by the other.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                               2.9

         Example 13: A agrees to sell his books to B for ` 100.

         B's promise to pay ` 100 is the consideration for A's promise to sell his books.

         A's promise to sell the books is the consideration for B's promise to pay ` 100.

V. Lawful Consideration and Object: The consideration and object of the agreement
         must be lawful.

         Section 23 states that consideration or object is not lawful if it is prohibited by law, or
         it is such as would defeat the provisions of law, if it is fraudulent or involves injury to
         the person or property of another or court regards it as immoral or opposed to public
         policy.

         Example 14: `A' promises to drop prosecution instituted against `B' for robbery and
         `B' promises to restore the value of the things taken. The agreement is void, as its
         object is unlawful.

         Example 15: A agrees to sell his house to B against 100 kgs of cocaine (drugs). Such
         agreement is illegal as the consideration is unlawful.

VI. Not expressly declared to be void: The agreement entered into must not be which the
         law declares to be either illegal or void. An illegal agreement is an agreement expressly
         or impliedly prohibited by law. A void agreement is one without any legal effects.

         Example 16: Threat to commit murder or making/publishing defamatory statements
         or entering into agreements which are opposed to public policy are illegal in nature.
         Similarly, any agreement in restraint of trade, marriage, legal proceedings, etc. are
         classic examples of void agreements.

1.3 TYPES OF CONTRACTS

Now let us discuss various types of contracts.

Type of Contract on the basis of

    Validity or             Formation           Performance
  enforceability         Express contract
  Valid contracts        Implied contract       Executed contract
  Void contracts          Quasi-contract
                                                Executory contract
Voidable contracts          E-contracts
                                                Unilateral       Bilateral
Illegal agreements                              contract         contract

Unenforceable contracts
2.10  BUSINESS LAWS

I. On the basis of the validity

         1. Valid Contract: An agreement which is binding and enforceable is a valid
                   contract. It contains all the essential elements of a valid contract.

                   Example 17: A ask B if he wants to buy his bike for ` 50,000. B agrees to buy
                   bike. It is agreement which is enforceable by law. Hence, it is a valid contract.

         2. Void Contract: Section 2 (j) states as follows: "A contract which ceases to be
                   enforceable by law becomes void when it ceases to be enforceable". Thus, a void
                   contract is one which cannot be enforced by a court of law.

                   Example 18: Mr. X agrees to write a book with a publisher. Such contract is
                   valid. But after few days, X dies in an accident. Here the contract becomes void
                   due to the impossibility of performance of the contract. Thus, a valid contract
                   when cannot be performed because of some uncalled happening becomes
                   void.

                   Example 19: A contracts with B (owner of the factory) for the supply of 10 tons
                   of sugar, but before the supply is effected, the fire caught in the factory and
                   everything was destroyed. Here the contract becomes void.

                   It may be added by way of clarification here that when a contract is void, it is
                   not a contract at all but for the purpose of identifying it, it has to be called a
                   [void] contract.

         3. Voidable Contract: Section 2(i) defines that "an agreement which is
                   enforceable by law at the option of one or more parties thereto, but not
                   at the option of the other or others is a voidable contract".

                   This in fact means where one of the parties to the agreement is in a position or
                   is legally entitled or authorized to avoid performing his part, then the
                   agreement is treated and becomes voidable.

                   Following are the situations where a contract is voidable:

                   (i) When the consent of party is not free is caused by coercion, undue
                             influence, misrepresentation or fraud.

                             Example 20: X promise to sell his scooter to Y for ` 1 Lac. However,
                             the consent of X has been procured by Y at a gun point. X is an
                             aggrieved party, and the contract is voidable at his option but not on
                             the option of Y. It means if X accepts the contract, the contract
                             becomes a valid contract then Y has no option of rescinding the
                             contract.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872         2.11

(ii) When a person promises to do something for another person, but the
         other person prevents him from performing his promise, the contract
         becomes voidable at the option of first person.

Example 21: There is a contact between A and B to sell car of A to B
for ` 2,00,000. On due date of performance, A asks B that he does not
want to sell his car. Here contract is voidable at the option of B.

(iii) When a party to a contract promise to perform a work within a
         specified time, could not perform with in that time, the contract is
         voidable at the option of promisee.

Example 22: A agrees to construct a house for B upto 31-3-2022 but
A could not complete the house on that date. Here contract is voidable
at the option of B.

At this juncture it would be desirable to know the distinction between
a Void Contract and a Voidable Contract. These are elaborated
hereunder:

S. Basis           Void Contract Voidable Contract
No.

1  Meaning         A       Contract   An agreement which is
                                      enforceable by law at the
                   ceases to be       option of one or more of the
                                      parties thereto, but not at the
                   enforceable by     option of the other or others,
                                      is a voidable contract.
                   law becomes

                   void when it

                   ceases to be

                   enforceable.

2  Enforceability  A void contract    It is enforceable only at the
                                      option of aggrieved party
                   cannot         be  and not at the option of
                                      other party.
                   enforced at all.

3  Cause           A       contract   A contract becomes a
                                      voidable contract if the
                   becomes void       consent of a party was not
                                      free.
                   due to change in

                   law or change in

                   circumstances

                   beyond        the

                   contemplation

                   of parties.
2.12        BUSINESS LAWS

       4    Performance A void contract If the aggrieved party does

            of contract  cannot      be not, within reasonable time,

                         performed.         exercise his right to avoid the

                                            contract, any party can sue

                                            the other for claiming the

                                            performance of the contract.

       5    Rights       A void contract    The party whose consent
                         does not grant     was not free has the right to
                         any legal remedy   rescind the contract within a
                         to any party.      reasonable time. If so
                                            rescinded, it becomes a void
                                            contract. If it is not rescinded
                                            it becomes a valid contract.

4. Illegal Contract: It is a contract which the law forbids to be made. The court
         will not enforce such a contract but also the connected contracts. All illegal
         agreements are void but all void agreements are not necessarily illegal. Despite
         this, there is similarity between them is that in both cases they are void ab initio
         and cannot be enforced by law.

         Example 23: Contract that is immoral or opposed to public policy are illegal in
         nature. Similarly, if R agrees with S, to purchase brown sugar, it is an illegal
         agreement.

According to Section 2(g) of the Indian Contract Act, "an agreement not
enforceable by law is void". The Act has specified various factors due to which
an agreement may be considered as void agreement. One of these factors is
unlawfulness of object and consideration of the contract i.e. illegality of the
contract which makes it void. The illegal and void agreement differ from each
other in the following respects:

Basis       of Void agreement               Illegal agreement

difference

Scope       A void agreement is not An illegal agreement is

            necessarily illegal.            always void.

Nature      Not forbidden under law. Are forbidden under law.

Punishment  Parties are not liable for any  Parties       to   illegal
            punishment under the law.
                                            agreements are liable for

                                            punishment.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872               2.13

Collateral  It's not necessary that         Agreements collateral to
Agreement   agreements collateral to        illegal agreements are
            void agreements may also        always void.
            be void. It may be valid also.

5. Unenforceable Contract: Where a contract is good in substance but because
         of some technical defect i.e. absence in writing, barred by limitation etc. one or
         both the parties cannot sue upon it, it is described as an unenforceable contract.

         Example 24: A bought goods from B in 2018. But no payment was made till
         2022. B cannot sue A for the payment in 2022 as it has crossed three years and
         barred by Limitation Act. A good debt becomes unenforceable after the period
         of three years as barred by Limitation Act.

         Similarly, an agreement for transfer of immovable property should be written
         for being enforceable.

II. On the basis of the formation of contract

         1. Express Contracts: A contract would be an express contract if the terms are
                   expressed by words or in writing. Section 9 of the Act provides that if a proposal
                   or acceptance of any promise is made in words, the promise is said to be
                   express.

                   Example 25: A tells B on telephone that he offers to sell his house for ` 20 lacs
                   and B in reply informs A that he accepts the offer, this is an express contract.

         2. Implied Contracts: Implied contracts in contrast come into existence by
                   implication. Most often the implication is by action or conduct of parties or
                   course of dealings between them. Section 9 of the Act contemplates such
                   implied contracts when it lays down that in so far as such proposal or
                   acceptance is made otherwise than in words, the promise is said to be implied.

                   Example 26: Where a coolie in uniform picks up the luggage of A to be carried
                   out of the railway station without being asked by A and A allows him to do so,
                   it is an implied contract and A must pay for the services of the coolie detailed
                   by him.

                   Example 27: A drinks a coffee in restaurant. There is an implied contract that
                   he should pay for the price of coffee.

                   Tacit Contracts: The word Tacit means silent. Tacit contracts are those that are
                   inferred through the conduct of parties without any words spoken or written. A
                   classic example of tacit contract would be when cash is withdrawn by a
2.14  BUSINESS LAWS

                   customer of a bank from the automatic teller machine [ATM]. Another example
                   of tacit contract is where a contract is assumed to have been entered when a
                   sale is given effect to at the fall of hammer in an auction sale. It is not a separate
                   form of contract but falls within the scope of implied contracts.

         3. Quasi-Contract: A quasi-contract is not an actual contract, but it resembles a
                   contract. It is created by law under certain circumstances. The law creates and
                   enforces legal rights and obligations when no real contract exists. Such
                   obligations are known as quasi-contracts. In other words, it is a contract in
                   which there is no intention on part of either party to make a contract but law
                   imposes a contract upon the parties.

                   Example 28: Obligation of finder of lost goods to return them to the true owner
                   or liability of person to whom money is paid under mistake to repay it back
                   cannot be said to arise out of a contract even in its remotest sense, as there is
                   neither offer and acceptance nor consent. These are said to be quasi-contracts.

                   Example 29: T, a tradesman, leaves goods at C's house by mistake. C treats the
                   goods as his own. C is bound to pay for the goods.

         4. E-Contracts: When a contract is entered into by two or more parties using
                   electronics means, such as e-mails is known as e-commerce contracts. In
                   electronic commerce, different parties/persons create networks which are
                   linked to other networks through ED1 - Electronic Data Inter change. This helps
                   in doing business transactions using electronic mode. These are known as EDI
                   contracts or Cyber contracts or mouse click contracts.

III. On the basis of the performance of the contract

         1. Executed Contract: The consideration in a given contract could be an act or
                   forbearance. When the act is done or executed or the forbearance is brought
                   on record, then the contract is an executed contract.

                   Example 30: When a grocer sells a sugar on cash payment it is an executed
                   contract because both the parties have done what they were to do under the
                   contract.

         2. Executory Contract: In an executory contract the consideration is reciprocal
                   promise or obligation. Such consideration is to be performed in future only and
                   therefore these contracts are described as executory contracts.

                   Example 31: Where G agrees to take the tuition of H, a pre-engineering
                   student, from the next month and H in consideration promises to pay G
                   ` 1,000 per month, the contract is executory because it is yet to be carried out.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.15

                   Unilateral or Bilateral are kinds of Executory Contracts and are not separate
                   kinds.

                   (a) Unilateral Contract: Unilateral contract is a one sided contract in
                             which one party has performed his duty or obligation and the other
                             party's obligation is outstanding.

                             Example 32: M advertises payment of award of ` 50,000 to any one
                             who finds his missing boy and brings him. As soon as B traces the boy,
                             there comes into existence an executed contract because B has
                             performed his share of obligation and it remains for M to pay the
                             amount of reward to B. This type of Executory contract is also called
                             unilateral contract.

                   (b) Bilateral Contract: A Bilateral contract is one where the obligation or
                             promise is outstanding on the part of both the parties.

                             Example 33: A promises to sell his plot to B for `10 lacs cash down,
                             but B pays only ` 2,50,000 as earnest money and promises to pay the
                             balance on next Sunday. On the other hand, A gives the possession of
                             plot to B and promises to execute a sale deed on the receipt of the
                             whole amount. The contract between the A and B is executory because
                             there remains something to be done on both sides. Such Executory
                             contracts are also known as Bilateral contracts.

    1.4 PROPOSAL / OFFER [SECTION 2(a) OF THE INDIAN

             CONTRACT ACT, 1872]

Definition of Offer/Proposal:

According to Section 2(a) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, "when one person signifies to
another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing anything with a view to obtaining the
assent of that other to such act or abstinence, he is said to make a proposal".

Essentials of a proposal/offer are-

1. The person making the proposal or offer is called the `promisor' or `offeror': The
         person to whom the offer is made is called the `offeree' and the person accepting the
         offer is called the `promisee' or `acceptor'.

2. For a valid offer, the party making it must express his willingness `to do' or `not
         to do' something: There must be an expression of willingness to do or not to do
         some act by the offeror.
2.16           BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 34: A willing to sell his good at certain price to B.

         Example 35: A is willing to not to dance in a competition if B pays him certain sum of
         money.

3. The willingness must be expressed with a view to obtain the assent of the other
         party to whom the offer is made.

         Example 36: Where `A' tells `B' that he desires to marry by the end of 2022, it does not
         constitute an offer of marriage by `A' to `B'. Therefore, to constitute a valid offer
         expression of willingness must be made to obtain the assent (acceptance) of the other.
         Thus, if in the above example, `A' further adds, `Will you marry me', it will constitute
         an offer.

4. An offer can be positive as well as negative: Thus "doing" is a positive act and "not
         doing", or "abstinence" is a negative act; nonetheless both these acts have the same
         effect in the eyes of law.

         Example 37: A offers to sell his car to B for ` 3 lacs is an act of doing. So in this case,
         A is making an offer to B.

         Example 38: When A ask B after his car meets with an accident with B's scooter not
         to go to Court and he will pay the repair charges to B for the damage to B's scooter; it
         is an act of not doing or abstinence.

                                                     Kinds of Offer

How made                               To whom made

Express offer  Implied offer  General offer   Specific offer

Classification of offer

An offer can be classified as general offer, special/specific offer, cross offer, counter offer,
standing/ open/ continuing offer.

General        Special        Counter  Cross  Standing
 Offer          Offer          Offer   Offer    Offer
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.17

Now let us examine each one of them.

(a) General offer: It is an offer made to public at large and hence anyone can accept and
         do the desired act (Carlill Vs. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co.). In terms of Section 8 of the
         Act, anyone performing the conditions of the offer can be considered to have accepted
         the offer. Until the general offer is retracted or withdrawn, it can be accepted by anyone
         at any time as it is a continuing offer.

         Case Law: Carlill Vs. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co. (1893)

         Facts: In this famous case, Carbolic smoke Ball Co. advertised in several newspapers
         that a reward of £100 would be given to any person who contracted influenza after
         using the smoke balls produced by the Carbolic Smoke Ball Co. according to printed
         directions. One lady, Mrs. Carlill, used the smoke balls as per the directions of company
         and even then, suffered from influenza. Held, she could recover the amount as by using
         the smoke balls she had accepted the offer.

(b) Special/specific offer: When the offer is made to a specific or an ascertained person,
         it is known as a specific offer. Specific offer can be accepted only by that specified
         person to whom the offer has been made. [Boulton Vs. Jones]

         Example 39: `A' offers to sell his car to `B' at a certain cost. This is a specific offer.

(c) Cross offer: When two parties exchange identical offers in ignorance at the time of
         each other's offer, the offers are called cross offers. There is no binding contract in
         such a case because offer made by a person cannot be construed as acceptance of the
         another's offer.

         Example 40: If A makes a proposal to B to sell his car for ` 2 lacs and B, without
         knowing the proposal of A, makes an offer to purchase the same car at ` 2 lacs from
         A, it is not an acceptance, as B was not aware of proposal made by A. It is only cross
         proposal (cross offer). And when two persons make offer to each other, it cannot be
         treated as mutual acceptance. There is no binding contract in such a case.

(d) Counter offer: When the offeree offers to qualified acceptance of the offer subject to
         modifications and variations in the terms of original offer, he is said to have made a
         counter offer. Counter-offer amounts to rejection of the original offer. It is also called
         as Conditional Acceptance.

         Example 41: `A' offers to sell his plot to `B' for `10 lakhs. 'B' agrees to buy it for ` 8
         lakhs. It amounts to counter offer. It will result in the termination of the offer of 'A'. If
         later on `B' agrees to buy the plot for ` 10 lakhs, 'A' may refuse.
2.18  BUSINESS LAWS

(e) Standing or continuing or open offer: An offer which is allowed to remain open for
         acceptance over a period of time is known as standing or continuing or open offer.
         Tenders that are invited for supply of goods is a kind of standing offer.

Essential of a valid offer

1. It must be capable of creating legal relations: Offer must be such as in law is capable
         of being accepted and giving rise to legal relationship. If the offer does not intend to
         give rise to legal consequences and creating legal relations, it is not considered as a
         valid offer in the eye of law. A social invitation, even if it is accepted, does not create
         legal relations because it is not so intended.

         Example 42: A invited B on his birthday party. B accepted the proposal but when B
         reached the venue, he (B) found that A was not there. He filed the suit against A for
         recovery of travelling expenses incurred by him to join the birthday party. Held, such
         an invitation did not create a legal relationship. It is a social activity. Hence, B could
         not succeed.

2. It must be certain, definite and not vague: If the terms of an offer are vague or
         indefinite, its acceptance cannot create any contractual relationship.

         Example 43: A offers to sell B 100 quintals of oil, there is nothing whatever to show
         what kind of oil was intended. The offer is not capable of being accepted for want of
         certainty.

         If in the above example, A is a dealer in mustard oil only, it shall constitute a valid offer.

3. It must be communicated to the offeree: An offer, to be complete, must be
         communicated to the person to whom it is made, otherwise there can be no acceptance
         of it. Unless an offer is communicated, there can be no acceptance by it. An acceptance
         of an offer, in ignorance of the offer, is not acceptance and does not confer any right
         on the acceptor.

         This can be illustrated by the landmark case of Lalman Shukla v. GauriDutt

         Facts: G (Gauridutt) sent his servant L (Lalman) to trace his missing nephew. He then
         announced that anybody who traced his nephew would be entitled to a certain reward.
         L traced the boy in ignorance of this announcement. Subsequently when he came to
         know of the reward, he claimed it. Held, he was not entitled to the reward, as he did
         not know the offer.

4. It must be made with a view to obtaining the assent of the other party: Offer must
         be made with a view to obtaining the assent of the other party addressed and not
         merely with a view to disclosing the intention of making an offer.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.19

5. It may be conditional: An offer can be made subject to any terms and conditions by
         the offeror.

         Example 44: Offeror may ask for payment by RTGS, NEFT etc. The offeree will have to
         accept all the terms of the offer otherwise the contract will be treated as invalid.

6. Offer should not contain a term the non-compliance of which would amount to
         acceptance: Thus, one cannot say that if acceptance is not communicated by a certain
         time the offer would be considered as accepted.

         Example 45: A proposes B to purchase his android mobile for `5000 and if no reply
         by him in a week, it would be assumed that B had accepted the proposal. This would
         not result into contract.

7. The offer may be either specific or general: Any offer can be made to either public
         at large or to the any specific person. (Already explained in the heading-types of the
         offer)

8. The offer may be express or implied: An offer may be made either by words or by
         conduct.

         Example 46: A boy starts cleaning the car as it stops on the traffic signal without being
         asked to do so, in such circumstances any reasonable man could guess that he expects
         to be paid for this, here boy makes an implied offer.

9. Offer is Different from a mere statement of intention, an invitation to offer, a
         mere communication of information, A prospectus and Advertisement.

         (i) A statement of intention and announcement.

                   Example 47: A father wrote his son about his wish of making him the owner of
                   all his property is mere a statement of intention.

                   Example 48: An announcement to give scholarships to children scoring more
                   than 95% in 12th board is not an offer.

         (ii) Offer must be distinguished from an answer to a question.

                   Case Law: Harvey vs. Facie [1893] AC 552

                   In this case, Privy Council succinctly explained the distinction between an offer
                   and an invitation to offer. In the given case, the plaintiffs through a telegram
                   asked the defendants two questions namely,

                   (i) Will you sell us Bumper Hall Pen? and

                   (ii) Telegraph lowest cash price.
2.20  BUSINESS LAWS

         The defendants replied through telegram that the "lowest price for Bumper Hall
         Pen is £ 900". The plaintiffs sent another telegram stating "we agree to buy
         Bumper Hall Pen at £ 900". However, the defendants refused to sell the property
         at the price.

         The plaintiffs sued the defendants contending that they had made an offer to
         sell the property at £ 900 and therefore they are bound by the offer.

         However, the Privy Council did not agree with the plaintiffs on the ground that
         while plaintiffs had asked two questions, the defendant replied only to the
         second question by quoting the price but reserved their answer with regard to
         their willingness to sell. Thus, they made no offer at all. Their Lordships held
         that the mere statement of the lowest price at which the vendor would sell
         contained no implied contract to sell to the person who had enquired about
         the price.

         The above decision was followed in Mac Pherson vs Appanna [1951] A.S.C.
         184 where the owner of the property had said that he would not accept less
         than £ 6000/- for it. This statement did not indicate any offer but indicated only
         an invitation to offer.

(iii) A statement of price is not an offer: Quoting the price of a product does not
         constitute it as offer. (refer case of Harvey Vs. Facie as discussed above)

         Example 49: The price list of goods does not constitute an offer for sale of
         certain goods on the listed prices. It is an invitation to offer.

(iv) An invitation to make an offer or do business. In case of "an invitation to make
         an offer", the person making the invitation does not make an offer rather invites
         the other party to make an offer. His objective is to send out the invitation that he
         is willing to deal with any person who, on the basis of such invitation, is ready to
         enter into contract with him subject to final terms and conditions.

         Example 50: An advertisement for sale of goods by auction is an invitation to
         the offer. It merely invites offers/bids made at the auction.

         When goods are sold through auction, the auctioneer does not contract with
         anyone who attends the sale. The auction is only an advertisement to sell but
         the items are not put for sale though persons who have come to the auction
         may have the intention to purchase. Similar decision was given in the case of
         Harris vs. Nickerson (1873).

         Similarly, Prospectus issued by a company, is only an invitation to the public to
         make an offer to subscribe to the securities of the company.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.21

10. A statement of price is not an offer

         What is invitation to offer?

         An offer should be distinguished from an invitation to offer. An offer is definite
         and capable of converting an intention into a contract. Whereas an invitation to an
         offer is only a circulation of an offer, it is an attempt to induce offers and precedes a
         definite offer. An invitation to offer is an act precedent to making an offer. Acceptance
         of an invitation to an offer does not result in the contract and only an offer emerges
         in the process of negotiation.

         When a person advertises that he has stock of books to sell or houses to let, there is
         no offer to be bound by any contract. Such advertisements are offers to negotiate-
         offers to receive offers. In order to ascertain whether a particular statement amounts
         to an `offer' or an `invitation to offer', the test would be intention with which such
         statement is made. Does the person who made the statement intend to be bound by
         it as soon as it is accepted by the other or he intends to do some further act, before
         he becomes bound by it. In the former case, it amounts to an offer and in the latter
         case, it is an invitation to offer.

         Difference between offer and invitation to make an offer:

         In terms of Section 2(a) of the Act, an offer is the final expression of willingness by the
         offeror to be bound by the offer should the other party chooses to accept it. On the
         other hand, offers made with the intention to negotiate or offers to receive offers are
         known as invitation to offer. Thus, where a party without expressing his final willingness
         proposes certain terms on which he is willing to negotiate he does not make an offer,
         but only invites the other party to make an offer on those terms. Hence the only thing
         that is required is the willingness of the offeree to abide by the terms of offer.

         In order to ascertain whether a particular statement amounts to an offer or an
         invitation to offer, the test would be intention with which such statement is made. The
         mere statement of the lowest price which the vendor would sell contains no implied
         contract to sell at that price to the person making the inquiry.

         If a person who makes the statement has the intention to be bound by it as soon as
         the other accepts, he is making an offer. Thus, the intention to be bound is important
         factor to be considered in deciding whether a statement is an `offer' or `invitation to
         offer.'

         Following are instances of invitation to offer to buy or sell:

         (i) A Prospectus by a company to the public to subscribe for its shares.

         (ii) Display of goods for sale in shop windows.
           2.22          BUSINESS LAWS

    (iii) Advertising auction sales and

    (iv) Quotation of prices sent in reply to a query regarding price.

    Basis                Offer                          Invitation to offer

    Meaning              Section 2(a) of the Act, an    Where a party without expressing
                         offer is the final expression  his final willingness proposes
                         of willingness by the          certain terms on which he is
                         offeror to be bound by the     willing to negotiate he does not
                         offer should the other party   make an offer, but only invites the
                         chooses to accept it.          other party to make an offer on
                                                        those terms.

    Intention of the     If a person who makes the      If a person has the intention of
    parties              statement has the intention    negotiating on terms it is called
                         to be bound by it as soon      invitation to offer.
                         as the other accepts, he is
                         making an offer.

    Sequence             An offer cannot be an act An invitation to offer is always an
                         precedent to invitation to act precedent to offer.
                         offer.

    Offer can be made                  Act              Words                Written
               by                 Abstinence             Conduct                Oral

    1.5 ACCEPTANCE

Definition of Acceptance: In terms of Section 2(b) of the Act, `the term acceptance' is defined
as follows:

"When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, proposal
is said to be accepted. The proposal, when accepted, becomes a promise".

Analysis of the above definition

1.  When the person to whom proposal is made - for example if A offers to sell his car to

    B for ` 2,00,000. Here, proposal is made to B.

2.  The person to whom proposal is made i.e. B in the above example and if B signifies his

    consent on that proposal, then we can say that B has signified his consent on the

    proposal made by A.
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872         2.23

3.  When B has signified his consent on that proposal, we can say that the proposal has

    been accepted.

4.  Accepted proposal becomes promise.

Relationship between offer and acceptance: According to Sir William Anson "Acceptance
is to offer what a lighted match is to a train of gun powder". The effect of this observation
is that what acceptance triggers cannot be recalled or undone. But there is a choice to the
person who had the train to remove it before the match is applied. It in effect means that the
offer can be withdrawn just before it is accepted. Acceptance converts the offer into a promise
and then it is too late to revoke it. This means as soon as the train of gun powder is lighted it
would explode. Train of Gun powder [offer] in itself is inert, but it is the lighted match [the
acceptance] which causes the gun powder to explode. The significance of this is an offer in
itself cannot create any legal relationship but it is the acceptance by the offeree which creates
a legal relationship. Once an offer is accepted it becomes a promise and cannot be withdrawn
or revoked. An offer remains an offer so long as it is not accepted but becomes a contract as
soon as it is accepted.

Legal Rules regarding a valid acceptance

(1) Acceptance can be given only by the person to whom offer is made: In case of a
         specific offer, it can be accepted only by the person to whom it is made. [Boulton vs.
         Jones (1857)]

    Case Law: Boulton vs. Jones (1857)

    Facts: Boulton bought a business from Brocklehurst. Jones, who was Broklehurst's
    creditor, placed an order with Brocklehurst for the supply of certain goods. Boulton
    supplied the goods even though the order was not in his name. Jones refused to pay
    Boultan for the goods because by entering into the contract with Blocklehurst, he
    intended to set off his debt against Brocklehurst. Held, as the offer was not made to
    Boulton, therefore, there was no contract between Boulton and Jones.

    In case of a general offer, it can be accepted by any person who has the knowledge of
    the offer. [Carlill vs. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co. (1893)]

(2) Acceptance must be absolute and unqualified: As per section 7 of the Act,
         acceptance is valid only when it is absolute and unqualified and is also expressed in
         some usual and reasonable manner unless the proposal prescribes the manner in which
         it must be accepted. If the proposal prescribes the manner in which it must be
         accepted, then it must be accepted accordingly.

    M offered to sell his land to N for £280. N replied purporting to accept the offer but
    enclosed a cheque for £ 80 only. He promised to pay the balance of £ 200 by monthly
2.24  BUSINESS LAWS

         instalments of £ 50 each. It was held that N could not enforce his acceptance because it
         was not an unqualified one. [Neale vs. Merret [1930] W. N. 189].

         A offers to sell his house to B for ` 30,00,000/-. B replied that, "I can pay ` 24,00,000
         for it. The offer of `A' is rejected by `B' as the acceptance is not unqualified. B however
         changes his mind and is prepared to pay ` 30,00,000/-. This is also treated as counter
         offer and it is upto A whether to accept it or not. [Union of India vs. Bahulal AIR
         1968 Bombay 294].

         Example 51: `A' enquires from `B', "Will you purchase my car for ` 2 lakhs?" If `B' replies
         "I shall purchase your car for ` 2 lakhs, if you buy my motorcycle for
         ` 50,000/-, here `B' cannot be considered to have accepted the proposal. If on the other
         hand `B' agrees to purchase the car from `A' as per his proposal subject to availability
         of valid Registration Certificate / book for the car, then the acceptance is in place
         though the offer contained no mention of R.C. book. This is because expecting a valid
         title for the car is not a condition. Therefore, the acceptance in this case is
         unconditional.

(3) The acceptance must be communicated: To conclude a contract between the parties,
         the acceptance must be communicated in some perceptible form. Any conditional
         acceptance or acceptance with varying or too deviant conditions is no acceptance.
         Such conditional acceptance is a counter proposal and has to be accepted by the
         proposer, if the original proposal has to materialize into a contract. Further when a
         proposal is accepted, the offeree must have the knowledge of the offer made to him.
         If he does not have the knowledge, there can be no acceptance. The acceptance must
         relate specifically to the offer made. Then only it can materialize into a contract. The
         above points will be clearer from the following examples:

         Brogden vs. Metropolitan Railway Co. (1877)

         Facts: B a supplier, sent a draft agreement relating to the supply of coal to the manager
         of railway Co. viz, Metropolitian railway for his acceptance. The manager wrote the
         word "Approved" on the same and put the draft agreement in the drawer of the table
         intending to send it to the company's solicitors for a formal contract to be drawn up.
         By an over sight the draft agreement remained in drawer. Held, that there was no
         contract as the manager had not communicated his acceptance to the supplier, B.

         Where an offer made by the intended offeree without the knowledge that an offer has
         been made to him cannot be deemed as an acceptance thereto. (Bhagwandas v.
         Girdharilal)

         A mere variation in the language not involving any difference in substance would not
         make the acceptance ineffective. [Heyworth vs. Knight [1864] 144 ER 120].
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.25

         Example 52: A proposed B to marry him. B informed A's sister that she is ready to
         marry him. But his sister didn't inform A about the acceptance of proposal. There is no
         contract as acceptance was not communicated to A.

(4) Acceptance must be in the prescribed mode: Where the mode of acceptance is
         prescribed in the proposal, it must be accepted in that manner. But if the proposer
         does not insist on the proposal being accepted in the manner prescribed after it has
         been accepted otherwise, i.e., not in the prescribed manner, the proposer is presumed
         to have consented to the acceptance.

         Example 53: If the offeror prescribes acceptance through messenger and offeree
         sends acceptance by email, there is no acceptance of the offer if the offeror informs
         the offeree that the acceptance is not according to the mode prescribed. But if the
         offeror fails to do so, it will be presumed that he has accepted the acceptance and a
         valid contract will arise.

(5) Time: Acceptance must be given within the specified time limit, if any, and if no time
         is stipulated, acceptance must be given within the reasonable time and before the offer
         lapses. What is reasonable time is nowhere defined in the law and thus would depend
         on facts and circumstances of the particular case.

         Example 54: A offered to sell B 50 kgs of bananas at Rs. 500. B communicated the
         acceptance after four days. Such is not a valid contract as bananas being perishable
         items could not stay for a period of week. Four days is not a reasonable time in this
         case.

         Example 55: A offers B to sell his house at Rs. 20,00,000. B accepted the offer and
         communicated to A after 4 days. Held the contract is valid as four days can be
         considered as reasonable time in case of sell of house.

(6) Mere silence is not acceptance: The acceptance of an offer cannot be implied from
         the silence of the offeree or his failure to answer, unless the offeree has in any previous
         conduct indicated that his silence is the evidence of acceptance.

         Case Law: Felthouse vs. Bindley (1862)

         Facts: F (Uncle) offered to buy his nephew's horse for £30 saying "If I hear no more
         about it I shall consider the horse mine at £30." The nephew did not reply to F at all.
         He told his auctioneer, B to keep the particular horse out of sale of his farm stock as
         he intended to reserve it for his uncle. By mistake the auctioneer sold the horse. F sued
         him for conversion of his property. Held, F could not succeed as his nephew had not
         communicated the acceptance to him.
2.26  BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 56: 'A' subscribed for the weekly magazine for one year. Even after expiry of
         his subscription, the magazine company continued to send him magazine for five
         years. And also `A' continued to use the magazine but denied to pay the bills sent to
         him. 'A' would be liable to pay as his continued use of the magazine was his acceptance
         of the offer.

(7) Acceptance by conduct/Implied Acceptance: Section 8 of the Act lays down that "the
         performance of the conditions of a proposal, or the acceptance of any consideration
         for a reciprocal promise which may be offered with a proposal, constitutes an
         acceptance of the proposal. This section provides the acceptance of the proposal by
         conduct as against other modes of acceptance i.e. verbal or written communication.

         Therefore, when a person performs the act intended by the proposer as the
         consideration for the promise offered by him, the performance of the act constitutes
         acceptance.

         Example 57: when a tradesman receives an order from a customer and executes the
         order by sending the goods, the customer's order for goods constitutes the offer,
         which has been accepted by the trades man subsequently by sending the goods. It is
         a case of acceptance by conduct.

    1.6 COMMUNICATION OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE

The importance of `offer' and `acceptance' in giving effect to a valid contract was explained in
the previous paragraphs. One important common requirement for both `offer' and
`acceptance' is their effective communication. Effective and proper communication prevents
avoidable revocation and misunderstanding between parties.

When the contracting parties are face-to-face, there is no problem of communication because
there is instantaneous communication of offer and acceptance. In such a case the question of
revocation does not arise since the offer and its acceptance are made instantly.

The difficulty arises when the contracting parties are at a distance from one another and they
utilise the services of the post office or telephone or email (internet). In such cases, it is very
much relevant for us to know the exact time when the offer or acceptance is made or
complete.

The Indian Contract Act, 1872 gives a lot of importance to "time" element in deciding when
the offer and acceptance is complete.

Communication of offer: In terms of Section 4 of the Act, "the communication of offer is
complete when it comes to the knowledge of the person to whom it is made".
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.27

Example 58: Where `A' makes a proposal to `B' by post to sell his house for ` 5 lakhs and if
the letter containing the offer is posted on 10th March and if that letter reaches `B' on 12th
March the offer is said to have been communicated on 12th March when B received the letter.

Thus, it can be summed up that when a proposal is made by post, its communication will be
complete when the letter containing the proposal reaches the person to whom it is made.

Mere receiving of the letter is not sufficient, he must receive or read the message contained
in the letter.

He receives the letter on 12th March, but he reads it on 15th of March. In this case offer is
communicated on 15th of March, and not 12th of March.

Communication of acceptance: There are two issues for discussion and understanding. They
are: The modes of acceptance and when is acceptance complete?

Let us, first consider the modes of acceptance. Section 3 of the Act prescribes in general
terms two modes of communication namely, (a) by any act and (b) by omission, intending
thereby, to communicate to the other or which has the effect of communicating it to the other.

Communication by act would include any expression of words whether written or oral.
Written words will include letters, telegrams, faxes, emails and even advertisements. Oral
words will include telephone messages. Again communication would include any conduct
intended to communicate like positive acts or signs so that the other person understands
what the person `acting ` or `making signs' means to say or convey.

Communication of acceptance by `omission' to do something. Such omission is conveyed
by a conduct or by forbearance on the part of one person to convey his willingness or assent.
However, silence would not be treated as communication by `omission'.

Example 59: A offers ` 50,000 to B if he does not arrive before the court of law as an evidence
to the case. B does not arrive on the date of hearing to the court. Here omission of doing an
act amounts to acceptance.

Communication of acceptance by conduct. For instance, delivery of goods at a price by a
seller to a willing buyer will be understood as a communication by conduct to convey
acceptance. Similarly, one need not explain why one boards a public bus or drop a coin in a
weighing machine. The first act is a conduct of acceptance against its communication to the
offer by the public transport authority to carry any passenger. The second act is again a
conduct conveying acceptance to use the weighing machine kept by the vending company as
an offer to render that service for a consideration.

The other issue in communication of acceptance is about the effect of act or omission or
conduct. These indirect efforts must result in effectively communicating its acceptance or non
acceptance. If it has no such effect, there is no communication regardless of which the
acceptor thinks about the offer within himself. Thus, a mere mental unilateral assent in one's
2.28  BUSINESS LAWS

own mind would not amount to communication. Where a resolution passed by a bank to sell
land to `A' remained uncommunicated to `A', it was held that there was no communication
and hence no contract. [Central Bank Yeotmal vs Vyankatesh (1949) A. Nag. 286].

Let us now come to the issue of when communication of acceptance is complete. In terms of
Section 4 of the Act, it is complete,

(i) As against the proposer, when it is put in the course of transmission to him so as to
         be out of the power of the acceptor to withdraw the same;

(ii) As against the acceptor, when it comes to the knowledge of the proposer.

Where a proposal is accepted by a letter sent by the post, the communication of
acceptance will be complete as against the proposer when the letter of acceptance is posted
and as against the acceptor when the letter reaches the proposer.

For instance in the above example, if `B' accepts, A's proposal and sends his acceptance by
post on 14th, the communication of acceptance as against `A' is complete on 14th, i.e. when
the letter is posted. As against `B' acceptance will be complete, when the letter reaches `A'.

Here `A' the proposer will be bound by B's acceptance, even if the letter of acceptance is delayed
in post or lost in transit. The golden rule is proposer becomes bound by the contract, the moment
acceptor has posted the letter of acceptance. But it is necessary that the letter is correctly
addressed, adequately stamped and duly posted. In such an event the loss of letter in transit,
wrong delivery, non delivery etc., will not affect the validity of the contract.

However, from the view point of acceptor, he will be bound by his acceptance only when the
letter of acceptance has reached the proposer. So, it is crucial in this case that the letter
reaches the proposer. If there is no delivery of the letter, the acceptance could be treated as
having been completed from the viewpoint of proposer but not from the viewpoint of
acceptor. Of course this will give rise to an awkward situation of only one party to the contract,
being treated as bound by the contract though no one would be sure as to where the letter
of acceptance had gone.

Acceptance over telephone or telex or fax: When an offer is made of instantaneous
communication like telex, telephone, fax or through e-mail, the contract is only complete
when the acceptance is received by the offeree, and the contract is made at the place where
the acceptance is received (Entores Ltd. v. Miles Far East Corporation). However, in case of
a call drops and disturbances in the line, there may not be a valid contract.

Communication of special conditions: Sometimes there are situations where there are
contracts with special conditions. These special conditions are conveyed tacitly and the
acceptance of these conditions are also conveyed by the offeree again tacitly or without him
even realizing it.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.29

Example 60: Where a passenger undertakes a travel, the conditions of travel are printed at
the back of the tickets, sometimes these special conditions are brought to the notice of the
passenger, sometimes not. In any event, the passenger is treated as having accepted the
special condition the moment he bought his ticket.

When someone travels from one place to another by air, it could be seen that special
conditions are printed at the back of the air ticket in small letters [in a non-computerized train
ticket even these are not printed] Sometimes these conditions are found to have been
displayed at the notice board of the Airlines office, which passengers may not have cared to
read. The question here is whether these conditions can be considered to have been
communicated to the passengers of the Airlines and can the passengers be treated as having
accepted the conditions. The answer to the question is in the affirmative and was so held in
Mukul Datta vs. Indian Airlines [1962] AIR cal. 314 where the plaintiff had travelled from
Delhi to Kolkata by air and the ticket bore conditions in fine print. But such terms and
condition should be reasonable.

Example 61: Where a launderer gives his customer a receipt for clothes received for washing. The
receipt carries special conditions and are to be treated as having been duly communicated to the
customer and therein a tacit acceptance of these conditions is implied by the customer's
acceptance of the receipt [Lily White vs. R. Mannuswamy [1966] A. Mad. 13].

CASE LAW: Lilly White vs. Mannuswamy (1970)

Facts: P delivered some clothes to drycleaner for which she received a laundry receipt
containing a condition that in case of loss, customer would be entitled to claim 15% of the
market price of value of the article, P lost her new saree. Held, the terms were unreasonable
and P was entitled to recover full value of the saree from the drycleaner.

In the cases referred above, the respective documents have been accepted without a protest
and hence amounted to tacit acceptance.

Standard forms of contracts: It is well established that a standard form of contract may be
enforced on another who is subjectively unaware of the contents of the document, provided
the party wanting to enforce the contract has given notice which, in the circumstances of a
case, is sufficiently reasonable. But the acceptor will not incur any contractual obligation, if
the document is so printed and delivered to him in such a state that it does not give
reasonable notice on its face that it contains certain special conditions. In this connection, let
us consider a converse situation. A transport carrier accepted the goods for transport without
any conditions. Subsequently, he issued a circular to the owners of goods limiting his liability
for the goods. In such a case, since the special conditions were not communicated prior to
the date of contract for transport, these were not binding on the owners of goods [Raipur
transport Co. vs. Ghanshyam [1956] A. Nag.145].
2.30  BUSINESS LAWS

    1.7 COMMUNICATION OF PERFORMANCE

We have already discussed that in terms of Section 4 of the Act, communication of a proposal
is complete when it comes to the knowledge of the person to whom it is meant. As regards
acceptance of the proposal, the same would be viewed from two angles. These are:

(i) from the viewpoint of proposer and

(ii) the other from the viewpoint of acceptor himself

From the viewpoint of proposer, when the acceptance is put into a course of transmission,
when it would be out of the power of acceptor. From the viewpoint of acceptor, it would be
complete when it comes to the knowledge of the proposer.

At times the offeree may be required to communicate the performance (or act) by way of
acceptance. In this case, it is not enough if the offeree merely performs the act but he should
also communicate his performance unless the offer includes a term that a mere performance
will constitute acceptance. The position was clearly explained in the famous case of Carlill
Vs Carbolic & Smokeball Co. In this case the defendant a sole proprietary concern
manufacturing a medicine which was a carbolic ball whose smoke could be inhaled through
the nose to cure influenza, cold and other connected ailments issued an advertisement for
sale of this medicine. The advertisement also included a reward of $100 to any person who
contracted influenza, after using the medicine (which was described as `carbolic smoke ball').
Mrs. Carlill bought these smoke balls and used them as directed but contracted influenza. It
was held that Mrs. Carlill was entitled to a reward of $100 as she had performed the condition
for acceptance. Further as the advertisement did not require any communication of
compliance of the condition, it was not necessary to communicate the same. The court thus
in the process laid down the following three important principles:

(i) an offer, to be capable of acceptance, must contain a definite promise by the offeror
         that he would be bound provided the terms specified by him are accepted;

(ii) an offer may be made either to a particular person or to the public at large, and

(iii) if an offer is made in the form of a promise in return for an act, the performance of
         that act, even without any communication thereof, is to be treated as an acceptance
         of the offer.

    1.8 REVOCATION OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE

If there are specific requirements governing the making of an offer and the acceptance of that
offer, we also have specific law governing their revocation.

In term of Section 4, communication of revocation (of the proposal or its acceptance) is
complete.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.31

(i) as against the person who makes it when it is put into a course of transmission to
         the person to whom it is made so as to be out of the power of the person who makes
         it, and

(ii) as against the person to whom it is made, when it comes to his knowledge.

The above law can be illustrated as follows: If you revoke your proposal made to me by a
telegram, the revocation will be complete, as far as you are concerned when you have
dispatched the telegram. But as far as I am concerned, it will be complete only when I receive
the telegram.

As regards revocation of acceptance, if you go by the above example, I can revoke my
acceptance (of your offer) by a telegram. This revocation of acceptance by me will be complete
when I dispatch the telegram and against you, it will be complete when it reaches you.

But the important question for consideration is when a proposal can be revoked? And when
can an acceptance be revoked? These questions are more important than the question when
the revocation (of proposal and acceptance) is complete.

Ordinarily, the offeror can revoke his offer before it is accepted. If he does so, the offeree
cannot create a contract by accepting the revoked offer.

Example 62: the bidder at an auction sale may withdraw (revoke) his bid (offer) before it is
accepted by the auctioneer by fall of hammer.

An offer may be revoked by the offeror before its acceptance, even though he had originally
agreed to hold it open for a definite period of time. So long as it is a mere offer, it can be
withdrawn whenever the offeror desires.

Example 63: X offered to sell 50 bales of cotton at a certain price and promised to keep it
open for acceptance by Y till 6 pm of that day. Before that time X sold them to Z. Y accepted
before 6 p.m., but after the revocation by X. In this case it was held that the offer was already
revoked.

In terms of Section 5 of the Act a proposal can be revoked at any time before the
communication of its acceptance is complete as against the proposer. An acceptance may be
revoked at any time before the communication of acceptance is complete as against the
acceptor.

Example 64: A proposes, by a letter sent by post, to sell his house to B. B accepts the proposal
by a letter sent by post. A may revoke his proposal at any time before or at the moment when
B posts his letter of acceptance, but not afterwards. Whereas B may revoke his acceptance at
any time before or at the moment when the letter communicating it reaches A, but not
afterwards.

An acceptance to an offer must be made before that offer lapses or is revoked.
2.32  BUSINESS LAWS

The law relating to the revocation of offer is the same in India as in England, but the law
relating to the revocation of acceptance is different.

In English law, the moment a person expresses his acceptance of an offer, that moment the
contract is concluded, and such an acceptance becomes irrevocable, whether it is made orally
or through the post. In Indian law, the position is different as regards contract through post.

Contract through post- As acceptance, in English law, cannot be revoked, so that once the
letter of acceptance is properly posted the contract is concluded. In Indian law, the acceptor
or can revoke his acceptance any time before the letter of acceptance reaches the offeror, if
the revocation telegram arrives before or at the same time with the letter of acceptance, the
revocation is absolute.

Contract over Telephone- A contract can be made over telephone. The rules regarding offer
and acceptance as well as their communication by telephone or telex are the same as for the
contract made by the mutual meeting of the parties. The contract is formed as soon as the
offer is accepted but the offeree must make it sure that his acceptance is received by the
offeror, otherwise there will be no contract, as communication of acceptance is not complete.
If telephone unexpectedly goes dead during conversation, the acceptor must confirm again
that the words of acceptance were duly heard by the offeror.

Revocation of proposal otherwise than by communication: When a proposal is made, the
proposer may not wait indefinitely for its acceptance. The offer can be revoked otherwise than
by communication or sometimes by lapse.

Modes of revocation of offer

(i) By notice of revocation:

         Example 65: A offered B to sell goods at Rs. 5,000 through a post but before B could
         accept the offer A received highest bid for the goods from C. So, A revoked the offer
         to B by informing B over the telephone and sold goods to C.

(ii) By lapse of time: The time for acceptance can lapse if the acceptance is not given
         within the specified time and where no time is specified, then within a reasonable time.
         This is for the reason that proposer should not be made to wait indefinitely. It was held
         in Ramsgate Victoria Hotel Co. Vs Montefiore (1866 L.R.Z. Ex 109), that a person
         who applied for shares in June was not bound by an allotment made in November.
         This decision was also followed in India Cooperative Navigation and Trading Co.
         Ltd. Vs Padamsey Prem Ji. However, these decisions now will have no relevance in
         the context of allotment of shares since the Companies Act, 2013 has several provisions
         specifically covering these issues.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.33

(iii) By non-fulfilment of condition precedent: Where the acceptor fails to fulfill a
         condition precedent to acceptance the proposal gets revoked. This principle is laid
         down in Section 6 of the Act. The offeror for instance may impose certain conditions
         such as executing a certain document or depositing certain amount as earnest money.
         Failure to satisfy any condition will result in lapse of the proposal. As stated earlier
         `condition precedent' to acceptance prevents an obligation from coming into existence
         until the condition is satisfied. Suppose where `A' proposes to sell his house to be `B'
         for ` 5 lakhs provided `B' leases his land to `A'. If `B' refuses to lease the land, the offer
         of `A' is revoked automatically.

(iv) By death or insanity: Death or insanity of the proposer would result in automatic
         revocation of the proposal but only if the fact of death or insanity comes to the
         knowledge of the acceptor.

(v) By counter offer

(vi) By the non-acceptance of the offer according to the prescribed or usual mode

(vii) By subsequent illegality.

SUMMARY

Contract: A Contract is an agreement enforceable by law [Section 2(h)]. An agreement is
enforceable by law, if it is made by the free consent of the parties who are competent to
contract and the agreement is made with a lawful object and is for a lawful consideration and
is not hereby expressly declared to be void [Section 10]. All contracts are agreements, but all
agreements are not contracts. Agreements lacking any of the above said characteristics are
not contracts. A contract that ceases to be enforceable by law is called `void contract', [Section
2(i)], but an agreement which is enforceable by law at the option of one party thereto, but not
at the option of the other is called `voidable contract' [(Section 2(i)].

Offer and Acceptance: Offeror undertakes to do or to abstain from doing a certain act if the
offer is properly accepted by the offeree. Offer may be expressly made or may even be implied
by the conduct of the offeror, but it must have intention and be capable of creating legal
relations. The terms of offer must be certain or at least be capable of being made certain.

Acceptance of offer must be absolute and unqualified and must be according to the
prescribed or usual mode. If the offer has been made to a specific person, it must be accepted
by that person only, but a general offer may be accepted by any person.
2.34  BUSINESS LAWS

Communication of offer and acceptance, and revocation thereof-

(a) Communication of an offer is complete when it comes to the knowledge of the offeree.

(b) Communication of an acceptance is complete: As against the offeror when it is put in
         the course of transmission to him and as against the acceptor, when it comes to the
         knowledge of the offeror.

(c) Communication of revocation of an offer or acceptance is complete: It is complete as
         against the person making it, when it is put into a course of transmission so as to be
         out of power of the person making it and as against the person to whom it is made,
         when it comes to his knowledge.

 Meaning of certain terms

Proposal [(i.e., offer) Section 2(a)]    When one person signifies to another

Promise [Section 2 (b)]                  his willingness
Agreement [Section 2(e)]
Contract [Section 2(h)]                  to do or to abstain from doing anything
Promisor and Promisee [Section 2(c)]
                                         with a view to obtaining the assent of

                                         that either to-

                                         ·  such act; or

                                         ·  abstinence,

                                         he is said to make a proposal (i.e. offer).

                                         When the person to whom the proposal

                                         is made,

                                         signifies his assent thereto,

                                         the proposal is said to be accepted.

                                         A proposal, when accepted, becomes a

                                         promise.

                                         Every promise and every set of

                                         promises,

                                         forming consideration for each other,

                                         is an agreement.

                                         An agreement enforceable by law is a

                                         contract.

                                       When the proposal is accepted-

                                         the person making the proposal is

                                         called as `promisor'; and

                                         the person accepting the proposal is

                                         called as `promisee'.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.35

Consideration [Section 2(d)]      When, at the desire of the promisor, the
                                  promisee
Void agreement [Section 2(g)]
Voidable Contract [Section 2(i)]    has done or abstained from doing
Void contract [Section 2 (j)]
                                    something; or

                                    does or abstains from doing something;

                                    or any other person

                                    promises to do or abstain from doing

                                           something,
                                  Such act, abstinence or promise is called a
                                  consideration for the promise.

                                  An agreement not enforceable by law is said to
                                  be void.

                                  A void agreement is not enforceable from the
                                  very beginning, i.e. it is void ab initio.

                                  An agreement is a voidable contract if-

                                    it is enforceable by law at the option of

                                    one or more of the parties thereto,

                                    it is not enforceable by law at the option

                                    of the other or others.

                                    A contract

                                    which ceases to be enforceable by law

                                    becomes void when it ceases to be

                                    enforceable.

Indian Contract Act, 1872 (1st September 1872)

Promise [Sec.2(b)]  Agreement [Sec.2(e)]     Contract [Sec. 2(h)]

Offer (Proposal) +  Promise + Consideration         Agreement
    Acceptance                               +Enforceability by law

Note: Agreement may be social or legal. Social Agreement is not enforceable by law.
            2.36  BUSINESS LAWS

                                ESSENTIALS OF VALID CONTRACT

                  As given by                                             Not given by Section
                  Section 10                                                 10 but essential

  Offer &   Free  Capacity                     Lawful        Lawful       Agreement not
Acceptance                                 consideration     Object        declared void
            consent of parties

Two         Intention to                   Legal          Certainty of    Possibility of
Parties     create legal                   Formalities    meaning         Performance
            Relationship

                                           CLASSIFICATION OF CONTRACTS

        On the Basis of Validity or               On the Basis of         On the Basis of Performance
                 Enforceability                      Formation
                                                                          1. Executed Contracts: Both
1. Valid Contract: Contains all the        1. Express Contract: By        the parties have performed
essential elements of valid contract.      words spoken or written        their respective obligations.

2. Void Contract: Sec. 2(j): A contract,   2. Implied Contract or         2. Executory Contract: Both
which ceases to be enforceable by law.     tacit contract: Where the      the parties have yet to perform
                                           proposal or acceptance is      their obligations.
3. Voidable Contract: Sec.2(i): An         otherwise than in words.
agreement which is enforceable by law                                     a. Unilateral or one-sided
at the option of one or more of the        3. Quasi Contract: The         contract: Only one party has
parties thereto, but not at the option of                                 fulfilled his obligation
other or others.                           law creates and enforces
                                                                          b. Bilateral contract:
4. Illegal Contracts: A contract which is  legal          rights     and
forbidden by law.                                                         Both the parties have to
                                           obligations when no real       perform
5. Unenforceable Contract: Contract
is good in substance but having            contract exists.
technical defect
                                           4. E-Contracts: A contract
                                           is entered into by two or
                                           more parties using
                                           electronics means.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872       2.37

PROPOSAL OR OFFER Sec.2(a)

"When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing anything with a
view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or abstinence, he is said to make a proposal".

       Classification of Offer                             Essentials of A Valid Offer
                                    1. Must be with intent to create legal relationship
(a) General Offer: Offer to the     2. Terms of the offer must be certain, definite & unambiguous.
world at large.                     3. Must be communicated to the offeree.
                                    4. Must be made with a view to obtaining the assent of the
(b) Specific Offer: Offer made to   other party.
a definite person                   5. May be conditional.
                                    6. Must not contain a term the non-compliance of which
(c) Cross Offer: When two parties   amount acceptance.
make identical offers to each       7. May be general or specific or express or implied.
other                               8. An offer must be distinguished from an invitation to offer.

(d) Counter Offer: When offeree
imposes conditions which have
the effect of modifying or varying
the offer.

(e) Standing or continue or
open offer: Offer to public at
large for acceptance for certain
period of time

                                                   ACCEPTANCE Sec 2(b)

"When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, proposal is said to
be accepted. The proposal when accepted, becomes a promise".

             Legal Rules                 COMMUNICATION OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE

1. Given only by the person to      Mode of Communication: By Act, By Omission, By Conduct
whom offer is made.
                                    Communication of Offer: (Sec.4)
2. Must be absolute and
unqualified.                        The communication of offer is completed when it comes to
                                    the knowledge of person to whom it is made.
3. Must be communicated.
                                    Communication of Acceptance: (Sec.4)
4. Must be in the prescribed
mode.                               The communication of acceptance is complete-

5. Mere silence is not              - as against the proposer when it is put into a course of
acceptance.                              transmission to him, so as to be out of the power of
                                         acceptor to withdraw the same.
6. May be by conduct/implied
Acceptance                          - as against the acceptor when it comes to the
                                         knowledge of proposer.
2.38                  BUSINESS LAWS

                      REVOCATION OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE

Time for revocation                         Mode of Revocation

Proposal: Before the          1. By communication of notice.
communication of its
acceptance is complete as     2. By lapse of time it is not accepted within the
against the proposer.         prescribed time.

Acceptance:           Before  3. By non-fulfillment by the offeree of a
                              condition precedent to acceptance.
communication of the
                              4. By death or insanity of the offer or provided
acceptance is complete as     the offeree comes to know of it before
                              acceptance.
against the acceptor
                              5. If a counter-offer is made to it.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. An agreement enforceable by law is a
         (a) Promise
         (b) Contract
         (c) Obligation
         (d) Lawful promise

2. A void agreement is one which is -
         (a) Valid but not enforceable
         (b) Enforceable at the option of both the parties
         (c) Enforceable at the option of one party
         (d) Not enforceable in a court of law.

3. An agreement which is enforceable by law at the option of one or more of the parties
         thereon but not at the option of the other or others is a
         (a) Valid Contract
         (b) Void contract
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.39

         (c) Voidable contract
         (d) Illegal contract
4. When the consent of a party is not free, the contract is
         (a) Void
         (b) Voidable
         (c) Valid
         (d) Illegal
5. In case of illegal agreements, the collateral agreements are:
         (a) Valid
         (b) Void
         (c) Voidable
         (d) None of these
6. An offer may lapse by:
         (a) Revocation
         (b) Counter Offer
         (c) Rejection of offer by offeree
         (d) All of these
7. A proposal when accepted becomes a
         (a) Promise
         (b) Contract
         (c) Offer
         (d) Acceptance
8. If A says to B "I offer to sell my house to you for ` 40,00,000" and B accepts the offer by
         saying clearly "I accept your offer", it is a/an
         (a) Implied offer
         (b) Express offer
         (c) General offer
         (d) None of the above
2.40  BUSINESS LAWS

9. `A' offered a reward of ` 1,00,000 for recovery of some valuable missing articles. `B' who
         did not know of this offer, found the missing articles. Which one of the following is the
         correct solution to this problem?

         (a) Giving delivery of articles to `A' amounts to an acceptance and hence `B' is entitled
                  to get the reward of ` 1,00,000

         (b) Giving delivery of articles to `A' amounts to performance of a condition precedent
                  to an offer and hence there is valid acceptance. So `B' must get the reward of `
                   1,00,000

         (c) As there is no acceptance of an offer due to want of Knowledge, `B', is not entitled
                  to get the reward of ` 1,00,000

         (d) In the absence of any legal obligation on `A', no claim for reward of ` 1,00,000 is
                   maintainable by `B'.

10. Arun has two cars- one of white colour and another of red colour. He offers to sell one
         of the cars to Basu thinking that he is selling the car which has white colour. Basu agrees
         to buy the car thinking that Arun is selling the car which has red colour. Will this
         agreement become a valid contract?

         (a) Yes

         (b) No

         (c) Insufficient information

         (d) None of the above.
11. A dress is displayed in the showroom with a price tag attached to the dress. A buyer

         interested in the dress and ready to pay the price mentioned in the tag approached the
         shopkeeper for purchasing the dress.

         (a) The shopkeeper can refuse to sell the dress as display of dress is just an invitation
                   to offer.

         (b) The shopkeeper cannot refuse to sell the dress as the buyer has accepted the offer

         (c) In case of refusal, the shopkeeper will be liable for breach of contract

         (d) The shopkeeper cannot refuse to sell the dress but may charge higher price
12. A agrees to pay ` 1,000 to B if a certain ship returns within a year. However, the ship

         sinks within the year. In this case, the contract becomes

         (a) Valid

         (b) Void
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.41

         (c) Voidable
         (d) Illegal
13. A notice in the newspaper inviting tenders is
         (a) a proposal
         (b) An invitation to proposal
         (c) A promise
         (d) An invitation for negotiation
14. A telephonic acceptance is complete when the offer is
         (a) spoken into the telephone
         (b) heard but not understood by the offeror
         (c) heard and understood by the offeror
         (d) is received, heard and understood by some person in the offeror's house
15. A and B agree to deal in smuggled goods and share the profits. A refuses to give B's share
         of profit. In this case:
         (a) B can enforce the agreement in the court
         (b) B can only claim damages
         (c) B has no remedy as the contract is illegal
         (d) B can enforce the contract and claim damages
16. Which one of the following statements is correct?
         (a) Void agreements are always illegal
         (b) Illegal agreements are voidable
         (c) Illegal agreement can be ratified by the parties
         (d) Illegal agreements are always void
17. A voidable contract is one which
         (a) Can be enforced at the option of aggrieved party
         (b) Can be enforced at the option of both the parties
         (c) Cannot be enforced in a court of law
         (d) Courts prohibit
2.42  BUSINESS LAWS

18. When offer is made to a definite person, it is known as
         (a) General Offer
         (b) Cross Offer
         (c) Counter offer
         (d) Special offer

19. On the face of a ticket, it is mentioned that to look for the terms and conditions look
         behind. Mr. A bought the ticket but didn't read the terms and conditions. He:
         (a) is not bound by the terms and condition
         (b) may decide to bound by certain terms and ignore others
         (c) is bound by all the terms and conditions whether he read it or not
         (d) none of the above

20. It does not effect the free consent of the parties,
         (a) Fraud
         (b) Coercion
         (c) Incompetency of parties
         (d) Undue Influence

21. __________ contract is made without intention of parties.
         (a) Express
         (b) Implied
         (c) Quasi
         (d) Executory

22. A offers B to supply Books at Rs. 500 each. B accepts the same with condition of 30%
         discount. It is _______
         (a) Counter Offer
         (b) Cross Offer
         (c) Specific Offer
         (d) General Offer
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.43

Descriptive Questions

1. "All contracts are agreements, but all agreements are not contracts". Comment.
2. A sends an offer to B to sell his second-car for ` 1,40,000 with a condition that if B does

         not reply within a week, he (A) shall treat the offer as accepted. Is A correct in his
         proposition?

3. Explain the type of contracts in the following agreements under the Indian Contract Act,
         1872:

         (i) A coolie in uniform picks up the luggage of A to be carried out of the railway
                   station without being asked by A and A allows him to do so.

         (ii) Obligation of finder of lost goods to return them to the true owner.

         (iii) A contracts with B (owner of the factory) for the supply of 10 tons of sugar, but
                   before the supply is effected, the fire caught in the factory and everything was
                   destroyed.

4. Shambhu Dayal started "self service" system in his shop. Smt. Prakash entered the shop,
         took a basket and after taking articles of her choice into the basket reached the cashier
         for payments. The cashier refuses to accept the price. Can Shambhu Dayal be compelled
         to sell the said articles to Smt. Prakash? Decide as per the provisions of the Indian
         Contract Act, 1872.

5. State whether there is any contract in following cases:

         (a) A engages B to do certain work and remuneration to be paid as fixed by C.

         (b) A and B promise to pay for the studies of their maid's son

         (c) A takes a seat in public bus.

         (d) A, a chartered accountant promises to help his friend to file his return.

6. Miss Shakuntala puts an application to be a teacher in the school. She was appointed by
         the trust of the school. Her friend who works in the same school informs her about her
         appointment informally. But later due to some internal reasons her appointment was
         cancelled. Can Miss Shakuntala claim for damages?
         2.44         BUSINESS LAWS

ANSWER/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1. (b) 2. (d) 3. (c)                 4. (b) 5. (b) 6. (d)

7.  (a)  8.      (b)  9.  (c) 10. (b) 11. (a) 12. (b)

13. (b) 14. (c) 15. (c) 16. (d) 17. (a) 18. (d)

19. (c) 20 (c) 21 (c) 22 (a)

Answers to the Descriptive Questions

1. An agreement comes into existence when one party makes a proposal or offer to the
         other party and that other party gives his acceptance to it. A contract is an agreement
         enforceable by law. It means that to become a contract an agreement must give rise
         to a legal obligation i.e. duty enforceable by law. If an agreement is incapable of
         creating a duty enforceable by law, it is not a contract. There can be agreements which
         are not enforceable by law, such as social, moral or religious agreements. The
         agreement is a wider term than the contract. All agreements need not necessarily
         become contracts but all contracts shall always be agreements.

         All agreements are not contracts: When there is an agreement between the parties and
         they do not intend to create a legal relationship, it is not a contract.

         All contracts are agreements: For a contract there must be two things (a) an agreement
         and (b) enforceability by law. Thus, existence of an agreement is a pre-requisite
         existence of a contract. Therefore, it is true to say that all contracts are agreements.

         Thus, we can say that there can be an agreement without it becoming a contract, but
         we can't have a contract without an agreement.

2. Acceptance to an offer cannot be implied merely from the silence of the offeree, even
         if it is expressly stated in the offer itself. Unless the offeree has by his previous conduct
         indicated that his silence amount to acceptance, it cannot be taken as valid acceptance.
         So, in the given problem, if B remains silent, it does not amount to acceptance.

         The acceptance must be made within the time limit prescribed by the offer. The
         acceptance of an offer after the time prescribed by the offeror has elapsed will not
         avail to turn the offer into a contract.

3. (i) It is an implied contract and A must pay for the services of the coolie detailed
                   by him.

                   Implied Contracts: Implied contracts come into existence by implication. Most
                   often the implication is by law and or by action. Section 9 of the Act
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  2.45

                   contemplates such implied contracts when it lays down that in so far as such
                   proposal or acceptance is made otherwise than in words, the promise is said to
                   be implied.

         (ii) Obligation of finder of lost goods to return them to the true owner cannot be
                   said to arise out of a contract even in its remotest sense, as there is neither offer
                   and acceptance nor consent. These are said to be quasi-contracts.

                   Quasi-Contract: A quasi-contract is not an actual contract but it resembles a
                   contract. It is created by law under certain circumstances. The law creates and
                   enforces legal rights and obligations when no real contract exists. Such
                   obligations are known as quasi-contracts. In other words, it is a contract in
                   which there is no intention on part of either party to make a contract but law
                   imposes a contract upon the parties.

         (iii) The above contract is a void contract.

                   Void Contract: Section 2 (j) states as follows: "A contract which ceases to be
                   enforceable by law becomes void when it ceases to be enforceable". Thus, a
                   void contract is one which cannot be enforced by a court of law.

4. Invitation to offer: The offer should be distinguished from an invitation to offer. An
         offer is the final expression of willingness by the offeror to be bound by his offer should
         the party chooses to accept it. Where a party, without expressing his final willingness,
         proposes certain terms on which he is willing to negotiate, he does not make an offer,
         but invites only the other party to make an offer on those terms. This is the basic
         distinction between offer and invitation to offer.

         The display of articles with a price in it in a self-service shop is merely an invitation to
         offer. It is in no sense an offer for sale, the acceptance of which constitutes a contract.
         In this case, Smt. Prakash by selecting some articles and approaching the cashier for
         payment simply made an offer to buy the articles selected by her. If the cashier does
         not accept the price, the interested buyer cannot compel him to sell.

5. (a) It is a valid express contract

         (b) It is not a contract as it is a social agreement

         (c) It is an implied contract. A is bound to pay for the bus fare.

         (d) It is a social agreement without any intention to create a legal relationship.

6. No, Miss Shakuntala cannot claim damages. As per Section 4, communication of
         acceptance is complete as against proposer when it is put in the course of transmission
         to him.

         In the present case, school authorities have not put any offer letter in transmission. Her
         information from a third person will not form part of contract.
