2.138  BUSINESS LAWS

UNIT ­ 6: CONTINGENT AND QUASI CONTRACTS

                                            LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:

 Basic characteristics of `Contingent contract' and `Quasi-contract'
       so that you are able to distinguish between a contract of any of
       these types and a simple contract.

 Rules relating to enforcement of these in order to gain an
       understanding of rights and obligations of the parties to the
       contract.

UNIT OVERVIEW                                      Quasi-Contracts

          Contingent Contracts

Rules Relating to Enforcement                      Cases deemed as
    of Contingent Contracts                        Quasi-Contracts

Difference between Contingent
      & Wagering Contract

    6.1 CONTINGENT CONTRACTS

In this unit, we shall briefly examine what is called a `contingent contract', its essentials and
the rules regarding enforcement of this type of contracts. The Contract Act recognises
certain cases in which an obligation is created without a contract. Such obligations arise out
of certain relations which cannot be called as contracts in the strict sense. There is no offer,
no acceptance, no consensus ad idem and in fact neither agreement nor promise and yet the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.139

law imposes an obligation on one party and confers a right in favour of the other. We shall
have a look on these cases of `Quasi-contracts'.

A contract may be absolute or a contingent. An Absolute contract is one where the promisor
undertakes to perform the contract in any event without any condition.

Definition of `Contingent Contract' (Section 31)

"A contract to do or not to do something, if some event, collateral to such contract,
does or does not happen".

Contracts of Insurance, indemnity and guarantee fall under this category.

Example 1: A contracts to pay B ` 10,00,000 if B's house is burnt. This is a contingent
contract.

Example 2: A makes a contract with B to buy his house for ` 50,00,000 if he is able to secure
to bank loan for that amount. The contract is contingent contract.

Meaning of collateral Event: Pollock and Mulla defined collateral event as "an event
which is neither a performance directly promised as part of the contract, nor the whole of
the consideration for a promise".

Example 3: A contracts to pay B ` 10,00,000 if B's house is burnt. This is a contingent
contract. Here the burning of the B's house is neither a performance promised as part of the
contract nor it is the consideration obtained from B. The liability of A arises only on the
happening of the collateral event.

Example 4: A agrees to transfer his property to B if her wife C dies. This is a contingent
contract because the property can be transferred only when C dies.

Essentials of a contingent contract

(a) The performance of a contingent contract would depend upon the happening or
         non-happening of some event or condition. The condition may be precedent or
         subsequent.

         Example 5: `A' promises to pay ` 50,000 to `B' if it rains on first of the next month.

(b) The event referred to as collateral to the contract. The event is not part of the
         contract. The event should be neither performance promised nor a consideration for
         a promise.

         Thus (i) where A agrees to deliver 100 bags of wheat and B agrees to pay the price
         only afterwards, the contract is a conditional contract and not contingent; because
         the event on which B's obligation is made to depend is part of the promise itself and
         not a collateral event. (ii) Similarly, where A promises to pay B ` 1,00,000 if he marries

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.140  BUSINESS LAWS

         C, it is not a contingent contract. (iii) `A' agreed to construct a swimming pool for `B'
         for ` 20,00,000. And `B' agreed to make the payment only on the completion of the
         swimming pool. It is not a contingent contract as the event (i.e. construction of the
         swimming pool) is directly connected with the contract.

(c) The contingent event should not be a mere `will' of the promisor. The event
         should be contingent in addition to being the will of the promisor.

         Example 6: If A promises to pay B ` 100,000, if he so chooses, it is not a contingent
         contract. (In fact, it is not a contract at all). However, where the event is within the
         promisor's will but not merely his will, it may be contingent contract.

         Example 7: If A promises to pay B `100,000 if it rains on 1st April and A leave Delhi
         for Mumbai on a particular day, it is a contingent contract, because going to Mumbai
         is an event no doubt within A's will, but raining is not merely his will.

(d) The event must be uncertain. Where the event is certain or bound to happen, the
         contract is due to be performed, then it is a not contingent contract.

         Example 8: `A' agreed to sell his agricultural land to `B' after obtaining the necessary
         permission from the collector. As a matter of course, the permission was generally
         granted on the fulfilment of certain formalities. It was held that the contract was not
         a contingent contract as the grant of permission by the collector was almost a
         certainty.

    6.2 RULES RELATING TO ENFORCEMENT

The rules relating to enforcement of a contingent contract are laid down in sections 32, 33,
34, 35 and 36 of the Act.

(a) Enforcement of contracts contingent on an event happening:

         Section 32 says that "where a contingent contract is made to do or not to do
         anything if an uncertain future event happens, it cannot be enforced by law unless
         and until that event has happened. If the event becomes impossible, such contracts
         become void".

         Example 9: A contracts to pay B a sum of money when B marries C. C dies without
         being married to B. The Contract becomes void.

(b) Enforcement of contracts contingent on an event not happening: Section 33 says
         that "Where a contingent contract is made to do or not do anything if an uncertain
         future event does not happen, it can be enforced only when the happening of that
         event becomes impossible and not before".

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.141

         Example 10: Where `P' agrees to pay `Q' a sum of money if a particular ship does not
         return, the contract becomes enforceable only if the ship sinks so that it cannot
         return.

         Where A agrees to pay sum of money to B if certain ship does not return however
         the ship returns back. Here the contract becomes void.

(c) A contract would cease to be enforceable if it is contingent upon the conduct of
         a living person when that living person does something to make the `event' or
         `conduct' as impossible of happening.

         Section 34 says that "if a contract is contingent upon as to how a person will act at
         an unspecified time, the event shall be considered to have become impossible when
         such person does anything which renders it impossible that he should so act within
         any definite time or otherwise than under further contingencies".

         Example 11: Where `A' agrees to pay `B' a sum of money if `B' marries `C'. `C' marries
         `D'. This act of `C' has rendered the event of `B' marrying `C' as impossible; it is
         though possible if there is divorce between `C' and `D'.

         In Frost V. Knight, the defendant promised to marry the plaintiff on the death of his
         father. While the father was still alive, he married another woman. It was held that it
         had become impossible that he should marry the plaintiff and she was entitled to sue
         him for the breach of the contract.

(d) Contingent on happening of specified event within the fixed time: Section 35
         says that Contingent contracts to do or not to do anything, if a specified uncertain
         event happens within a fixed time, becomes void if, at the expiration of time fixed,
         such event has not happened, or if, before the time fixed, such event becomes
         impossible.

         Example 12: A promises to pay B a sum of money if certain ship returns within a
         year. The contract may be enforced if the ship returns within the year, and becomes
         void if the ship is burnt within the year.

(e) Contingent on specified event not happening within fixed time: Section 35 also
         says that - "Contingent contracts to do or not to do anything, if a specified uncertain
         event does not happen within a fixed time, may be enforced by law when the time
         fixed has expired, and such event has not happened or before the time fixed has
         expired, if it becomes certain that such event will not happen".

         Example 13: A promises to pay B a sum of money if a certain ship does not return
         within a year. The contract may be enforced if the ship does not return within the
         year, or is burnt within the year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.142                BUSINESS LAWS

(f) Contingent on an impossible event (Section 36): Contingent agreements to do or
         not to do anything, if an impossible event happens are void, whether the
         impossibility of the event is known or not to the parties to the agreement at the time
         when it is made.

         Example 14: `A' agrees to pay `B' `one lakh if sun rises in the west next morning.
         This is an impossible event and hence void.

         Example 15: X agrees to pay Y `1,00,000 if two straight lines should enclose a space.
         The agreement is void.

Difference between a contingent contract and a wagering contract

Basis of difference       Contingent contract         Wagering contract

Meaning                   A contingent contract is a  A wagering agreement is
                          contract to do or not to    a promise to give money
                          do something with           or money's worth with
                          reference to a collateral   reference to an uncertain
                          event happening or not      event happening or not
                          happening.                  happening.

Reciprocal promises       Contingent contract may A wagering agreement

                          not contain reciprocal consists of reciprocal

                          promises.                   promises.

Uncertain event           In a contingent contract, In a wagering contract,

                          the event is collateral.    the uncertain event is the

                                                      core factor.

Nature of contract        Contingent contract may A wagering agreement is

                          not be wagering in essentially contingent in

                          nature.                     nature.

Interest of contracting Contracting parties have The contracting parties

parties                   interest in the subject have no interest in the

                          matter in contingent subject matter.

                          contract.

Doctrine of mutuality of  Contingent contract is not  A wagering contract is a
lose and gain             based on doctrine of        game, losing and gaining
                          mutuality of lose and       alone matters.
                          gain.

Effect of contract        Contingent contract is A wagering agreement is

                          valid.                      void.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.143

    6.3 QUASI CONTRACTS

A valid contract must contain certain essential elements, such as offer and acceptance,
capacity to contract, consideration and free consent. But sometimes the law implies a
promise imposing obligations on one party and conferring right in favour of the other even
when there is no offer, no acceptance, no genuine consent, lawful consideration, etc. and in
fact neither agreement nor promise. Such cases are not contract in the strict sense, but the
Court recognises them as relations resembling those of contracts and enforces them as if
they were contracts. Hence the term Quasi ­contracts (i.e. resembling a contract). Even in
the absence of a contract, certain social relationships give rise to certain specific obligations
to be performed by certain persons. These are known as quasi contracts as they create same
obligations as in the case of regular contract.

Quasi contracts are based on principles of equity, justice and good conscience.

A quasi or constructive contract rest upon the maxims, "No man must grow rich out of
another person's loss".

Example 16: T, a tradesman, leaves goods at C's house by mistake. C treats the goods as his
own. C is bound to pay for the goods.

Example 17: A pays some money to B by mistake. It is really due to C. B must refund the
money to A.

Example 18: A fruit parcel is delivered under a mistake to R who consumes the fruits
thinking them as birthday present. R must return the parcel or pay for the fruits. Although
there is no agreement between R and the true owner, yet he is bound to pay as the law
regards it a Quasi-contract.

These relations are called as quasi-contractual obligations. In India it is also called as
`certain relation resembling those created by contracts.

Salient features of quasi contracts:

(a) In the first place, such a right is always a right to money and generally, though not
         always, to a liquidated sum of money.

(b) Secondly, it does not arise from any agreement of the parties concerned, but is
         imposed by the law; and

(c) Thirdly, it is a right which is available not against all the world, but against a
         particular person or persons only, so that in this respect it resembles a contractual
         right.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              2.144         BUSINESS LAWS

                            Cases Deemed as
                            Quasi - Contracts

 Claims for    Payment                             Obligation of   Responsibili  Money paid
necessaries       by an                               a person     ty of finder  by mistake
                                                      enjoying       of goods      or under
  supplied     interested                            benefit of    [Section 71]    coercion
[Section 68]     person                                  non                     [Section 72]

              [Section 69]                         gratuitous act
                                                    [Section 70]

Under the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, the relationship of quasi contract is deemed
to have come to exist in five different circumstances which we shall presently dilate upon.
But it may be noted that in none of these cases there comes into existence any contract
between the parties in the real sense. Due to peculiar circumstances in which they are
placed, the law imposes in each of these cases the contractual liability.

(a) Claim for necessaries supplied to persons incapable of contracting (Section 68):
         If a person, incapable of entering into a contract, or anyone whom he is legally
         bound to support, is supplied by another person with necessaries suited to his
         condition in life, the person who has furnished such supplies is entitled to be
         reimbursed from the property of such incapable person.

         Example 19: A supplies B, a lunatic, or a minor, with necessaries suitable to his
         condition in life. A is entitled to be reimbursed from B's property.

         To establish his claim, the supplier must prove not only that the goods were supplied
         to the person who was minor or a lunatic but also that they were suitable to his
         actual requirements at the time of the sale and delivery.

(b) Payment by an interested person (Section 69): A person who is interested in the
         payment of money which another is bound by law to pay, and who therefore pays it,
         is entitled to be reimbursed by the other.

         Example 20: B holds land in Bengal, on a lease granted by A, the zamindar. The
         revenue payable by A to the Government being in arrear, his land is advertised for
         sale by the Government. Under the revenue law, the consequence of the sale will be
         the annulment of B's lease. B, to prevent the sale and the consequent annulment of
         his own lease, pays to the government the sum due from A. A is bound to make
         good to B the amount so paid.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.145

(c) Obligation of person enjoying benefits of non-gratuitous act (Section 70): In
         term of section 70 of the Act "where a person lawfully does anything for another
         person, or delivers anything to him not intending to do so gratuitously and such
         other person enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter is bound to pay compensation to
         the former in respect of, or to restore, the thing so done or delivered".

         It thus follows that for a suit to succeed, the plaintiff must prove:

         (i) that he had done the act or had delivered the thing lawfully;

         (ii) that he did not do so gratuitously; and

         (iii) that the other person enjoyed the benefit.

         The above can be illustrated by a case law where `K' a government servant was
         compulsorily retired by the government. He filed a writ petition and obtained an
         injunction against the order. He was reinstated and was paid salary but was given no
         work and in the meantime government went on appeal. The appeal was decided in
         favour of the government and `K' was directed to return the salary paid to him during
         the period of reinstatement. [Shyam Lal vs. State of U.P. A.I.R (1968) 130]

         Example 21: A, a tradesman, leaves goods at B's house by mistake. B treats the
         goods as his own. He is bound to pay A for them.

(d) Responsibility of finder of goods (Section 71): `A person who finds goods
         belonging to another and takes them into his custody is subject to same
         responsibility as if he were a bailee'.

         Thus, a finder of lost goods has:

         (i) to take proper care of the property as man of ordinary prudence would take

         (ii) no right to appropriate the goods and

         (iii) to restore the goods if the owner is found.

         In Hollins vs. Howler L. R. & H. L., `H' picked up a diamond on the floor of `F's shop
         and handed over the same to `F' to keep till the owner was found. In spite of the best
         efforts, the true owner could not be traced. After the lapse of some weeks, `H'
         tendered to `F' the lawful expenses incurred by him and requested to return the
         diamond to him. `F' refused to do so. Held, `F' must return the diamond to `H' as he
         was entitled to retain the goods found against everybody except the true owner.

         Example 22: `P' a customer in `D's shop puts down a brooch worn on her coat and
         forgets to pick it up and one of `D's assistants finds it and puts it in a drawer over the
         weekend. On Monday, it was discovered to be missing. `D' was held to be liable in
         the absence of ordinary care which a prudent man would have taken.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            2.146       BUSINESS LAWS

(e) Money paid by mistake or under coercion (Section 72): "A person to whom
         money has been paid or anything delivered by mistake or under coercion, must repay
         or return it".

         Every kind of payment of money or delivery of goods for every type of `mistake' is
         recoverable. [Shivprasad Vs Sirish Chandra A.I.R. 1949 P.C. 297]

         Example 23: A payment of municipal tax made under mistaken belief or because of
         mis-understanding of the terms of lease can be recovered from municipal authorities.
         The above law was affirmed by Supreme Court in cases of Sales tax officer vs.
         Kanhaiyalal A. I. R. 1959 S. C. 835

         Similarly, any money paid by coercion is also recoverable. The word coercion is not
         necessarily governed by section 15 of the Act. The word is interpreted to mean and
         include oppression, extortion, or such other means [Seth Khanjelek vs National
         Bank of India].

         In a case where `T' was traveling without ticket in a tram car and on checking he was
         asked to pay `5/- as penalty to compound transaction. T filed a suit against the
         corporation for recovery on the ground that it was extorted from him. The suit was
         decreed in his favour. [Trikamdas vs. Bombay Municipal Corporation A. I. R.1954]

         In all the above cases the contractual liability arose without any agreement between
         the parties.

Difference between quasi contracts and contracts

Basis of distinction    Quasi- Contract            Contract

Essential for the valid The essentials for the The essentials for the

contract                formation of a valid formation of a valid

                        contract are absent        contract are present

Obligation              Imposed by law             Created by the consent of
                                                   the parties

SUMMARY

  Contingent Contracts are the contracts, which are conditional on some future event

  happening or not happening and are enforceable when the future event or loss

  occurs. (Section 31)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                               2.147

  RULES FOR ENFORCEMENT

  (a) If it is contingent on the happening of a future event, it is enforceable when
           the event happens. The contract becomes void if the event becomes
           impossible, or the event does not happen till the expiry of time fixed for
           happening of the event.

  (b) If it is contingent on a future event not happening. It can be enforced when
           happening of that event becomes impossible or it does not happen at the
           expiry of time fixed for non-happening of the event.

  (c) If the future event is the act of a living person, any conduct of that person
           which prevents the event happening within a definite time renders the event
           impossible.

  (d) If the future event is impossible at the time of the contract is made, the
           contract is void ab initio.

  Wagering Contracts are void.

  Quasi Contracts arise where obligations are created without a contract. The

  obligations which they give rise to are expressly enacted:

  (a) If necessaries are supplied to a person who is incapable of contracting, the
           supplier is entitled to claim their price from the property of such a person.

  (b) A person who is interested in the payment of money which another is bound
           to pay, and who therefore pays it, is entitled to be reimbursed by the other.

  (c) A person who enjoys the benefit of a non-gratuitous act is bound to make
           compensation.

  (d) A person who finds lost property may retain it subject to the responsibility of
           a bailee.

  (e) If money is paid or goods delivered by mistake or under coercion, the
           recipient must repay or make restoration.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.148         BUSINESS LAWS

                  CONTINGENT CONTRACT (SEC.31)

A contract to do or not to do something if some event, collateral to such contract,
does or does not happen. E.G. Contracts of insurance, indemnity or guarantee.

                                                          Legal Rules

Contingent upon                                    When can it be enforced When it become void?
Happening of an event
Non-happening of an event                          When event has happened When event becomes
Behavior of a person within
the specified time                                                             impossible
Happening of an event
within the specified time                          When the happening of the When event has happened.

Non-happening of an event                          event becomes impossible
within the specified time
                                                   Such person acts in When such person does
Happening of an impossible
event                                              specified manner.           anything which renders it

                                                                               impossible

                                                   When event has happened When event has not

                                                   within the specified time.  happened within the

                                                                               specified time OR

                                                                               Event becomes impossible

                                                                               before expiry of specified

                                                                               time.

                                                   When event has not When event has happened

                                                   happened within the within the specified time.

                                                   specified time OR

                                                   Event becomes impossible

                                                   before expiry of specified

                                                   time.

                                                   Void, whether the impossibility of the event is known or not

                                                   known to the parties to the agreement at the time when it

                                                   is made.

                                                   QUASI CONTRACTS

Under certain special circumstances, the law creates and enforces legal rights

and obligations, although the parties have never entered into a contract.

                                                   Types of Quasi Contracts

1.  Claims for necessities supplied to a person incompetent to contract (but upto

    property of incompetent.)

2.  Reimbursement to a person paying money due by another in the payment of

    which he is interested.

3.  Obligation of a person enjoying benefits of non-gratuitous (without any cost)

    acts.

4.  Responsibility of a finder of lost goods. His responsibility is same as that of a

    bailee.

5.  Liability of a person to whom money is paid or goods delivered under mistake

    or coercion.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.149

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. A contract dependent on the happening or non-happening of future uncertain event, is
         (a) Uncertain contract
         (b) Contingent contract
         (c) Void contract
         (d) Voidable contract

2. A contingent contract is
         (a) Void
         (b) Voidable
         (c) Valid
         (d) Illegal

3. A contingent contract dependent on the happening of future uncertain even can be
         enforced when the event
         (a) happens
         (b) becomes impossible
         (c) does not happen
         (d) either of these

4. A agrees to pay ` One lakh to B if he brings on earth a star from sky. This is a
         contingent contract and
         (a) Illegal
         (b) Valid
         (c) Voidable
         (d) Void

5. Which of the following is not a contingent contract:
         (a) A promise to pay B if he repairs his scooter.
         (b) A promise to pay B ` 10,000 if B's scooter is stolen.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.150  BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) A promise to pay B ` 10,000 if B's burnt his hands.
         (d) A promise to pay B ` 10,000 if it rains on first of the next month.
6. Which of the following statements regarding Quasi-contracts is incorrect:
         (a) It resembles a contract
         (b) It is imposed by law
         (c) It is based on the doctrine of unjust enrichment
         (d) It is voluntarily created
7. For a contingent contract the event must be:
         (a) Certain
         (b) Uncertain
         (c) Independent
         (d) Uncertain and collateral
8. Which one of the following is not a characteristic of a contingent contract?
         (a) Performance depends upon a future event
         (b) The event must be uncertain
         (c) The event must be collateral to the contract
         (d) There must be reciprocal promises
9. Wagering contracts are:
         (a) Void
         (b) Voidable
         (c) Valid
         (d) Illegal
10. A contract of insurance is:
         (a) Wagering contract
         (b) unilateral contract
         (c) Quasi contract
         (d) contingent contract

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                               2.151

11. Finder of goods should take care of goods as
         (a) bailee
         (b) owner
         (c) insurer
         (d) custodian

12. A swiggy man wrongly delivered the food to Mr. Ishaan. Ishaan who took the delivery,
         ate the food immediately. The swiggy boy returned soon once he got information about
         wrong delivery. Ishaan should make the payment as his case is deemed to be a quasi-
         contract under:
         (a) Claim for necessaries supplied to persons incapable of contracting
         (b) responsibility of finder of goods
         (c) Payment by an interest person
         (d) obligation of person enjoying benefits under non-gratuitous act

Descriptive Questions

1. Explain the-term `Quasi Contracts' and state their characteristics.

2. X, a minor was studying in M.Com. in a college. On 1st July, 2021 he took a loan of
         ` 1,00,000 from B for payment of his college fees and to purchase books and agreed to
         repay by 31st December, 2021. X possesses assets worth ` 9 lakhs. On due date, X
         fails to pay back the loan to B. B now wants to recover the loan from X out of his (X's)
         assets. Referring to the provisions of Indian Contract Act, 1872 decide whether B would
         succeed.

3. P left his carriage on D's premises. Landlord of D seized the carriage against the rent
         due from D. P paid the rent and got his carriage released. Can P recover the amount
         from D?

4.  Rahul found a smart watch in a restaurant. He enquired about all the customers

    present there but the true owner could not be found. He handed over the same to the

    manager of the restaurant to keep till the true owner is found. After a week he went

    back to the restaurant to enquire about the smart watch. The manager refused to

    return it to Rahul, saying that it did not belong to Rahul. In the light of the Indian

    Contract Act, 1872, can Rahul recover it from the Manager?

    © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             2.152           BUSINESS LAWS

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.      (b)  2.         (c)  3.                    (a)  4.  (d)  5.  (a)  6.  (d)

7. (d) 8. (d) 9. (a) 10. (d) 11. (a) 12. (d)

Answers to Descriptive Questions

1. Quasi Contracts: Under certain special circumstances, obligation resembling those
         created by a contract are imposed by law although the parties have never entered
         into a contract. Such obligations imposed by law are referred to as `Quasi-contracts'.
         Such a contract resembles with a contract so far as result or effect is concerned but it
         has little or no affinity with a contract in respect of mode of creation. These contracts
         are based on the doctrine that a person shall not be allowed to enrich himself
         unjustly at the expense of another. The salient features of a quasi-contract are:

    1.       It does not arise from any agreement of the parties concerned but is imposed

             by law.

    2.       Duty and not promise is the basis of such contract.

    3.       The right under it is always a right to money and generally though not always

             to a liquidated sum of money.

    4.       Such a right is available against specific person(s) and not against the whole

             world.

    5.       A suit for its breach may be filed in the same way as in case of a complete

             contract.

2. Yes, B can proceed against the assets of X. According to section 68 of Indian
         Contract Act, 1872, if a person, incapable of entering into a contract, or any one
         whom he is legally bound to support, is supplied by another person with necessaries
         suited to his condition in life, the person who has furnished such supplies is entitled
         to be reimbursed from the property of such incapable person.

    Since the loan given to X is for the necessaries suited to the conditions in life of the
    minor, his assets can be sued to reimburse B.

3. Yes, P can recover the amount from D. Section 69 states a person who is interested in
         the payment of money which another person is bound by law to pay, and who
         therefore pays it, is entitled to get it reimbursed by the other.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.153

         In the present case, D was lawfully bound to pay rent. P was interested in making the
         payment to D's landlord as his carriage was seized by him. Hence being an interested
         party P made the payment and can recover the same from D.

4. Responsibility of finder of goods (Section 71 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872):
         A person who finds goods belonging to another and takes them into his custody is
         subject to same responsibility as if he were a bailee.

         Thus, a finder of lost goods has:

         (i) to take proper care of the property as man of ordinary prudence would take

         (ii) no right to appropriate the goods and

         (iii) to restore the goods if the owner is found.

         In the light of the above provisions, the manager must return the smart watch to
         Rahul, since Rahul is entitled to retain the smart watch found against everybody
         except the true owner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
