          2.122         BUSINESS LAWS

UNIT ­ 5: BREACH OF CONTRACT AND ITS
                        REMEDIES

                                        LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:
 Concept of breach of contract and various modes thereof.
 How the damages are to be measured.

UNIT OVERVIEW

                                           Breach of Contract

Anticipatory Breach of  Actual Breach of                       Remedies for Breach of
         Contract            Contract                                   Contract

                         Suit for  Rescission of Suit for Specific           Suit for   Suit upon
                        Damages                                             Injunction  Quantum
                                                   contract    Performance
                                                                                          Meruit

Ordinary   Special      Vindictive                 Nominal     Prefixed
Damage    Damages       Damages                    Damages     Damages

                                                               Liquidated   Penalty
                                                               Damages

We have so far seen how a contract is made, the essential of a
valid contract and also how a contract is to be performed as well
as how a contract may be put an end. We shall now discuss
about the breach of contract and also the mode in which
compensation for breach of contract is estimated.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.123

Breach means failure of a party to perform his or her obligation under a contract. Breach of
contract may arise in two ways:

(1) Actual breach of contract

(2) Anticipatory breach of contract

    5.1 ANTICIPATORY BREACH OF CONTRACT

An anticipatory breach of contract is a breach of contract occurring before the time fixed for
performance has arrived. When the promisor refuses altogether to perform his promise and
signifies his unwillingness even before the time for performance has arrived, it is called
Anticipatory Breach.

Anticipatory breach of a contract may take either of the following two ways:

(a) Expressly by words spoken or written, and

(b) Impliedly by the conduct of one of the parties.
Example 1: Where A contracts with B on 15th July, 2022 to supply 10 bales of cotton for a
specified sum on 14th August, 2022 and on 30th July informs B, that he will not be able to
supply the said cotton on 14th August, 2022, there is an express rejection of the contract.
Example 2: Where A agrees to sell his white horse to B for ` 50,000/- on 10th of August,
2022, but he sells this horse to C on 1st of August, 2022, the anticipatory breach has
occurred by the conduct of the promisor.

Section 39 of the Indian Contract Act deals with anticipatory breach of contract and
provides as follows:

"When a party to a contract has refused to perform or disable himself from performing, his
promise in its entirety, the promisee may put an end to the contract, unless he has signified,
but words or conduct, his acquiescence in its continuance."

Effect of anticipatory breach: The promisee is excused from performance or from further
performance. Further he gets an option:

(1) To either treat the contract as "rescinded and sue the other party for damages from
         breach of contract immediately without waiting until the due date of performance;

         or

(2) He may elect not to rescind but to treat the contract as still operative and wait for
         the time of performance and then hold the other party responsible for the
         consequences of non-performance. But in this case, he will keep the contract alive for
         the benefit of the other party as well as his own, and the guilty party, if he so decides

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.124                      BUSINESS LAWS

         on re-consideration, may still perform his part of the contract and can also take
         advantage of any supervening impossibility which may have the effect of discharging
         the contract.

    5.2 ACTUAL BREACH OF CONTRACT

In contrast to anticipatory breach, it is a case of refusal to perform the promise on the
scheduled date. The parties to a lawful contract are bound to perform their respective
promises. But when one of the parties breaks the contract by refusing to perform his
promise, he is said to have committed a breach. In that case, the other party to the contract
obtains a right of action against the one who has refused to perform his promise.

Actual breach of contract may be committed-
(a) At the time when the performance of the contract is due.

         Example 3: A agrees to deliver 100 bags of sugar to B on 1st February 2022. On the
         said day, he failed to supply 100 bags of sugar to B. This is actual breach of contract.
         The breach has been committed by A at the time when the performance becomes
         due.

(b) During the performance of the contract: Actual breach of contract also occurs
         when during the performance of the contract, one party fails or refuses to perform
         his obligation under it by express or implied act.

         Remedies for Breach of Contract

                                                     Suit for Damages

       Remedies Available                          Rescission of Contract

                                                   Suit for specific performance

                                                   Suit for Injunction

                                                   Suit upon quantum meruit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
          THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                     2.125

    5.3 SUIT FOR DAMAGES

The Act in Section 73, has laid down the rules as to how the amount of compensation is to
be determined. On the breach of the contract, the party who suffers from such a breach is
entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss
or damage caused to him by breach.
Compensation can be claimed for any loss or damage which naturally arises in the usual
course of events.
A compensation can also be claimed for any loss or damage which the party knew when
they entered into the contract, as likely to result from the breach.
That is to say, special damage can be claimed only on a previous notice. But the party
suffering from the breach is bound to take reasonable steps to minimise the loss.
No compensation is payable for any remote or indirect loss.

                                            Damages

General/  Special  Vindictive or                   Nominal  Damages for    Pre-fixed
Ordinary           Exemplary                                deterioration  damages
                                                             caused by

                                                                delay

(i) Ordinary damages: When a contract has been broken, the party who suffers by such
         breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract,
         compensation for any loss or damage cause to him thereby, which naturally arose in
         the usual course of things from such breach, or which the parties know, when they
         made the contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it.

         Such compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect loss or damage
         sustained by reasons of the breach. (Section 73 of the Contract Act and the rule in
         Hadley vs. Baxendale).

         HADLEY vs. BAXENDALE- Facts

         The crankshaft of P's flour mill had broken. He gives it to D, a common carrier who
         promised to deliver it to the foundry in 2 days where the new shaft was to be made.
         The mill stopped working, D delayed the delivery of the crankshaft so the mill
         remained idle for another 5 days. P received the repaired crankshaft 7 days later than
         he would have otherwise received. Consequently, P sued D for damages not only for

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.126  BUSINESS LAWS

         the delay in the delivering the broken part but also for loss of profits suffered by
         the mill for not having been worked. The court held that P was entitled only to
         ordinary damages and D was not liable for the loss of profits because the only
         information given by P to D was that the article to be carried was the broken shaft of
         a mill and it was not made known to them that the delay would result in loss of
         pExroafmitsp.le 4: A agrees to sell to B bags of rice at ` 5,000 per bag, delivery to be given
         after two months. On the date of delivery, the price of rice goes up to ` 5,500 per
         bag. A refuse to deliver the bags to B. B can claim from A ` 500 as ordinary damages
         arising directly from the breach.

(ii) Special damages: Where a party to a contract receives a notice of special
         circumstances affecting the contract, he will be liable not only for damages arising
         naturally and directly from the breach but also for special damages.

         Example 5: `A' delivered a machine to `B', a common carrier, to be conveyed to `A's
         mill without delay. `A' also informed `B' that his mill was stopped for want of the
         machine. `B' unreasonably delayed the delivery of the machine, and in consequence
         `A' lost a profitable contract with the Government. In this case, `A' is entitled to
         receive from `B', by way of compensation, the average amount of profit, which would
         have been made by running the mill during the period of delay. But he cannot
         recover the loss sustained due to the loss of the Government contract, as `A's
         contract with the Government was not brought to the notice of `B'.

(iii) Vindictive or Exemplary damages

         These damages may be awarded only in two cases -

         (a) for breach of promise to marry because it causes injury to his or her feelings;
                   and

         (b) for wrongful dishonour by a banker of his customer's cheque because in this
                   case the injury due to wrongful dishonour to the drawer of cheque is so heavy
                   that it causes loss of credit and reputation to him. A business man whose
                   credit has suffered will get exemplary damages even if he has sustained no
                   pecuniary loss. But a non-trader cannot get heavy damages in the like
                   circumstances, unless the damages are alleged and proved as special
                   damages. (Gibbons v West Minister Bank)

(iv) Nominal damages: Nominal damages are awarded where the plaintiff has proved
         that there has been a breach of contract but he has not in fact suffered any real
         damage. It is awarded just to establish the right to decree for the breach of contract.
         The amount may be a rupee or even 10 paise.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.127

(v) Damages for deterioration caused by delay: In the case of deterioration caused to
         goods by delay, damages can be recovered from carrier even without notice. The
         word `deterioration' not only implies physical damages to the goods but it may also
         mean loss of special opportunity for sale.

(vi) Pre-fixed damages: Sometimes, parties to a contract stipulate at the time of its
         formation that on a breach of contract by any of them, a certain amount will be
         payable as damage. It may amount to either liquidated damages (i.e., a reasonable
         estimate of the likely loss in case of breach) or a penalty (i.e., an amount arbitrarily
         fixed as the damages payable). Section 74 provides that if a sum is named in a
         contract as the amount to be paid in case of a breach, the aggrieved party is entitled
         to receive from the party at fault a reasonable compensation not exceeding the
         amount so named (Section 74).

         Example 6: If the penalty provided by the contract is ` 1,00,000 and the actual loss
         because of breach is ` 70,000, only ` 70,000 shall be available as damages, i.e., the
         amount of actual loss and not the amount stipulated. But if the loss is, say,
         ` 1,50,000, then only, ` 1,00,000 shall be recoverable.

         Example 7: X promised Y, a priest, to pay ` 10,000 as charity. The priest on X's
         promise incurred certain liabilities towards the repairing of the temple to the extent
         of Rs. 7,500. Y, the priest, can recover from X ` 7,500.

5.4 PENALTY AND                                    LIQUIDATED  DAMAGES
         (SECTION 74)

The parties to a contract may provide before hand, the amount of compensation payable in
case of failure to perform the contract. In such cases, the question arises whether the courts
will accept this figure as the measure of damage.

English Law: According to English law, the sum so fixed in the contract may be interpreted
either as liquidated damages or as a penalty.

If the sum fixed in the contract represents a genuine pre-estimate by the parties of the loss,
which would be caused by a future breach of the contract it is liquidated damages. It is an
assessment of the amount which in the opinion of the parties will compensate for the
breach. Such a clause is effective and the amount is recoverable. But where the sum fixed in
the contract is unreasonable and is used to force the other party to perform the contract; it
is penalty. Such a clause of disregarded and the injured party cannot recover more than the
actual loss.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.128    BUSINESS LAWS

Indian Law: Indian law makes no distinction between `penalty `and liquidated damages'. The
Courts in India award only a reasonable compensation not exceeding the sum so mentioned
in the contract. Section 74 of the Contract Act lays down if the parties have fixed what the
damages will be, the courts will never allow more. But the court may allow less. A decree is
to be passed only for reasonable compensation not exceeding the sum named by the
parties. Thus, Section 74 entitles a person complaining of breach of contract to get
reasonable compensation and does not entitle him to realise anything by way of penalty.

Exception: Where any person gives any bond to the Central or State government for the
performance of any public duty or act in which the public are interested, on breach of the
condition of any such instrument, he shall be liable to pay the whole sum mentioned
therein.

Example 8: A contracts with B, that if A practices as a surgeon in Kolkata, he will pay B `
50,000. A practice as a surgeon at Kolkata, B is entitled to such compensation not exceeding
` 50,000 as the court considers reasonable.

Example 9: A borrows ` 10,000 from B and gives him a bond for ` 20,000 payable by five
yearly instalments of ` 4,000 with a stipulation that in default of payment, the whole shall
become due. This is a stipulation by way of penalty.

Example 10: A undertakes to repay B, a loan of ` 10,000 by five equal monthly instalments with
a stipulation that in default of payment of any instalment, the whole shall become due. This
stipulation is not by way of penalty and the contract may be enforced according to its terms.

Distinction between liquidated damages and penalty

Penalty and liquidated damages have one thing in common that both are payable on the
occurrence of a breach of contract. It is very difficult to draw a clear line of distinction
between the two but certain principles as laid down below may be helpful.

1.  If the sum payable is so large as to be far in excess of the probable damage on

    breach, it is certainly a penalty.

2.  Where a sum is expressed to be payable on a certain date and a further sum in the

    event of default being made, the latter sum is a penalty because mere delay in

    payment is unlikely to cause damage.

3.  The expression used by the parties is not final. The court must find out whether the

    sum fixed in the contract is in truth a penalty or liquidated damages. If the sum fixed

    is extravagant or exorbitant, the court will regard it is as a penalty even if, it is termed

    as liquidated damages in the contract.

4.  The essence of a penalty is payment of money stipulated as a terrorem of the

    offending party. The essence of liquidated damages is a genuine pre-estimate of the

    damage.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                             2.129

5.  English law makes a distinction between liquidated damages and penalty, but no

    such distinction is followed in India. The courts in India must ascertain the actual loss

    and award the same which amount must not, however exceed the sum so fixed in the

    contract. The courts have not to bother about the distinction but to award

    reasonable compensation not exceeding the sum so fixed.

Besides claiming damages as a remedy for the breach of contract, the following
remedies are also available:

(i) Rescission of contract: When a contract is broken by one party, the other party may
         treat the contract as rescinded. In such a case, he is absolved of all his obligations
         under the contract and is entitled to compensation for any damages that he might
         have suffered.

    Example 11: A promises B to deliver 50 bags of cement on a certain day. B agrees to
    pay the amount on receipt of the goods. A failed to deliver the cement on the
    appointed day. B is discharged from his liability to pay the price.

(ii) Quantum Meruit: Where one person has rendered service to another in
         circumstances which indicate an understanding between them that it is to be paid for
         although no particular remuneration has been fixed, the law will infer a promise to
         pay. Quantum Meruit i.e. as much as the party doing the service has deserved. It
         covers a case where the party injured by the breach had at time of breach done part
         but not all of the work which he is bound to do under the contract and seeks to be
         compensated for the value of the work done. For the application of this doctrine, two
         conditions must be fulfilled:

    (1) It is only available if the original contract has been discharged.

    (2) The claim must be brought by a party not in default.

    The object of allowing a claim on quantum meruit is to recompensate the party or
    person for value of work which he has done. Damages are compensatory in nature
    while quantum merit is restitutory. It is but reasonable compensation awarded on
    implication of a contract to remunerate. Where a person orders only 12 bottles of a
    whiskey from a wine merchant but also receives 2 bottles of brandy, and the
    purchaser accepts them, the purchaser must pay a reasonable price for the brandy.

    The claim for quantum meruit arises in the following cases:

    (a) When an agreement is discovered to be void or when a contract becomes
             void.

    (b) When something is done without any intention to do so gratuitously.

    (c) Where there is an express or implied contract to render services but there is
             no agreement as to remuneration.

    (d) When one party abandons or refuses to perform the contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.130  BUSINESS LAWS

         (e) Where a contract is divisible and the party not in default has enjoyed the
                   benefit of part performance.

         (f) When an indivisible contract for a lump sum is completely performed but
                   badly the person who has performed the contract can claim the lump sum,
                   but the other party can make a deduction for bad work.

         Example 12: X wrongfully revoked Y`s (his agent) authority before Y could complete
         his duties. Held, Y could recover, as a quantum meruit, for the work he had done and
         the expenses he had incurred in the course of his duties as an agent.

         Example 13: A agrees to deliver 100 bales of cottons to B at a price of ` 1000 per
         bale. The cotton bales were to be delivered in two instalments of 50 each. A delivered
         the first instalment but failed to supply the second. B must pay for 50 bags.

(iii) Suit for specific performance: Where damages are not an adequate remedy in the
         case of breach of contract, the court may in its discretion on a suit for specific
         performance direct party in breach, to carry out his promise according to the terms
         of the contract.

(iv) Suit for injunction: Where a party to a contract is negating the terms of a contract,
         the court may by issuing an `injunction orders', restrain him from doing what he
         promised not to do.

         Example 14: N, a film star, agreed to act exclusively for a particular producer, for one
         year. During the year she contracted to act for some other producer. Held, she could
         be restrained by an injunction.

         Example 15: A, a singer, agreed with B to perform at his theatre for two months, on
         a condition that during that period, he would not perform anywhere. In this case, B
         could move to the Court for grant of injunction restraining A from performing in
         other places.

         Party rightfully rescinding contract, entitled to compensation (Section 75)

         A person who rightfully rescinds a contract is entitled to compensation for any
         damage which he has sustained through non-fulfilment of the contract.

         Example 16: A, a singer, contracts with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing at his
         theatre for two nights in every week during the next two months, and B engages to
         pay her ` 10000 for each night's performance. On the sixth night, A wilfully absents
         herself from the theatre, and B, in consequence, rescinds the contract. B is entitled to
         claim compensation for the damage which he has sustained through the non-
         fulfilment of the contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                               2.131

SUMMARY

1.  In case of breach of contract by one party, the other party need not perform his part

    of the contract and is entitled to compensation for the loss occurred to him.

2.  Damages for breach of contract must be such loss or damage as naturally arise, in the usual

    course of things or which had been reasonably supposed to have been in contemplation of

    the parties when they made the contract, as the probable result of the breach.

3.  Any other damages are said to be remote or indirect damages, hence, cannot be

    claimed.

               REMEDIES FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT

     Suit for  Rescission of                       Suit for Specific         Suit for         Quantum
    Damages       Contract                           Performance           Injunction          Meruit

             Monetary Compensation                 Where damages are                   As much as earned
                  Kinds of Damages                 not an adequate
                                                   remedy, court may                   When a person has
    1. Ordinary Damages- Equal to actual           direct party in breach
    loss but not for indirect or remote loss.      to carry out his                    done some work
    2. Special Damages- Decided at the             promise according to
    time of contract entered.                      terms of contract.                  under a contract, and
    3. Exemplary Damages- Granted only
    in-case of breach of contract to marry                                             other           party
    & unjustified dishonor of cheque.
    4. Nominal Damages- When there is                                                  repudiated      the
    no loss
    5. Damages for deterioration caused                                                contract, or some
    by delay- Can be recovered from
    carrier even without notice.                                                       event happens which
    6. Liquidated Damages & Penalty-If
    damages equal to loss then liquidated                       Order of the           makes the further
    damages. If more that loss then                             court
    penalty (Note Under `English law'                                                  performance        of
    Liquidated damages are enforceable
    but penalties cannot be claimed).              Termination  Where a party          contract impossible
                                                   of contract
                                                   by promisee  does something         then party who has
                                                   when
                                                   promisor     which      he          performed the work
                                                   refuses to
                                                   perform.     promised not to        can             claim

                                                                do, the Court may      remuneration for the

                                                                issue an order,        work he has already

                                                                prohibit him from      done.

                                                                doing so.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.132  BUSINESS LAWS

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. When prior to the due date of performance, the promisor absolutely refuses to perform
         the contract, it is known as
         (a) abandonment of contract
         (b) remission of contract
         (c) actual breach of contract
         (d) anticipatory breach of contract

2. In case of anticipatory breach, the aggrieved party may treat the contract
         (a) as discharged and bring an immediate action for damages
         (b) as operative and wait till the time for performance arrives
         (c) exercise option either (a) or (b)
         (d) only option (a) is available

3. In case of breach of contract, which of the following remedy is available to the
         aggrieved party?
         (a) Suit for rescission
         (b) Suit for damages
         (c) Suit for specific performance
         (d) All of these

4. Sometimes, a party is entitled to claim compensation in proportion to the work done by
         him. It is possible by a suit for
         (a) damage
         (b) injunction
         (c) quantum meruit
         (d) none of these

5. Generally, the following damages are not recoverable?
         (a) Ordinary damages
         (b) Special damages

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.133

         (c) Remote damages
         (d) Nominal damages
6. Damages which arise naturally in usual course of things from breach itself are called:
         (a) Special damages
         (b) Liquidated damages
         (c) Nominal damages
         (d) General damages
7. A contracted to supply 200 bags of rice to B on 30th December, 2021. After supplying
         20 bags of rice. A informed B that he will not supply remaining bags of rice to B. In this
         case,
         (a) There is anticipatory breach of contract
         (b) There is actual breach of contract
         (c) Both of the above
         (d) None of the above
8. Where the Court orders the defaulting party to carry out the promise according to the
         terms of the contract, it is called
         (a) Quantum Meruit
         (b) Rescission
         (c) Injunction
         (d) Specific Performance
9. Quantum Meruit means
         (a) a non-gratuitous promise
         (b) as gratuitous promise
         (c) as much as is earned
         (d) as much as is paid
10. Wrongful dishonour of cheque by a banker having sufficient funds in the account of
         customer, the court may award:
         (a) Mitigation of damages
         (b) contemptuous damages
         (c) Quantum Meruit
         (d) exemplary damages

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         2.134        BUSINESS LAWS

Descriptive Questions

1. "An anticipatory breach of contract is a breach of contract occurring before the time
         fixed for performance has arrived". Discuss stating also the effect of anticipatory breach
         on contracts.

2. "Liquidated damage is a genuine pre-estimate of compensation of damages for certain
         anticipated breach of contract whereas Penalty on the other hand is an extravagant
         amount stipulated and is clearly unconscionable and has no comparison to the loss
         suffered by the parties". Explain.

3. `X' entered into a contract with `Y' to supply him 1,000 water bottles @ ` 5.00 per water
         bottle, to be delivered at a specified time. Thereafter, `X' contracts with `Z' for the
         purchase of 1,000 water bottles @ ` 4.50 per water bottle, and at the same time told `Z'
         that he did so for the purpose of performing his contract entered into with `Y'. `Z' failed
         to perform his contract in due course and market price of each water bottle on that day
         was ` 5.25 per water bottle. Consequently, `X' could not procure any water bottle and
         `Y' rescinded the contract. Calculate the amount of damages which `X' could claim
         from `Z' in the circumstances? What would be your answer if `Z' had not informed
         about the `Y's contract? Explain with reference to the provisions of the Indian Contract
         Act, 1872.

4. Mr. Chetan was travelling to Manali with his wife by bus of Himalayan Travels Pvt. Ltd.
         Due to some technical default in the bus, the driver has to stop the bus in a mid-way in
         cold night. The driver advised the passengers to get to the shelter in the nearest hotel
         which was at a distance of only one kilometer from that place. The wife of Mr. Chetan
         caught cold and fell ill due to being asked to get down and she had to walk in cold
         night to reach hotel. Mr. Chetan filed the suit against Himalayan Travels Pvt. Ltd. for
         damages for the personal inconvenience, hotel charges and medical treatment for his
         wife. Explain, whether Mr. Chetan would get compensation for which he filed the suit
         under the Indian Contract Act, 1872?

ANSWER/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.  (d)  2.      (c)  3.                           (d)  4.  (c)  5.  (c)  6.  (d)

7.  (b)  8.     (d)   9.                           (c) 10. (d)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.135

Answer of Descriptive Questions

1. An anticipatory breach of contract is a breach of contract occurring before the time
         fixed for performance has arrived. When the promisor refuses altogether to perform
         his promise and signifies his unwillingness even before the time for performance has
         arrived, it is called Anticipatory Breach. The law in this regard has very well summed
         up in Frost v. Knight and Hochster v. DelaTour:

         Section 39 of the Indian Contract Act deals with anticipatory breach of contract and
         provides as follows: "When a party to a contract has refused to perform or disable
         himself from performing, his promise in its entirety, the promisee may put an end to
         the contract, unless he has signified, but words or conduct, his acquiescence in its
         continuance."

         Effect of anticipatory breach: The promisee is excused from performance or from
         further performance. Further he gets an option:

         (1) To either treat the contract as "rescinded and sue the other party for damages
                   from breach of contract immediately without waiting until the due date of
                   performance; or

         (2) He may elect not to rescind but to treat the contract as still operative, and
                   wait for the time of performance and then hold the other party responsible
                   for the consequences of non-performance. But in this case, he will keep the
                   contract alive for the benefit of the other party as well as his own, and the
                   guilty party, if he so decides on re-consideration, may still perform his part of
                   the contract and can also take advantage of any supervening impossibility
                   which may have the effect of discharging the contract.

2. Liquidated damage is a genuine pre-estimate of compensation of damages for
         certain anticipated breach of contract. This estimate is agreed to between parties to
         avoid at a later date detailed calculation and the necessity to convince outside
         parties.

         Penalty on the other hand is an extravagant amount stipulated and is clearly
         unconscionable and has no comparison to the loss suffered by the parties.

         In terms of Section 74 of the Act "where a contract has been broken, if a sum is
         named in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of such breach, or if the
         contract contains any other stipulation by way of penalty, the party complaining of
         the breach is entitled, whether or not actual damages or loss is proved to have been
         caused thereby, to receive from the other party who has broken the contract, a

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.136  BUSINESS LAWS

         reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so named, or as the case may
         be the penalty stipulated for.

         Explanation to Section 74

         A stipulation for increased interest from the date of default may be a stipulation by
         way of penalty.

         In terms of Section 74, courts are empowered to reduce the sum payable on
         breach whether it is `penalty' or "liquidated damages" provided the sum
         appears to be unreasonably high.

         Sri ChunniLal vs. Mehta & Sons Ltd (Supreme Court)

         Supreme Court laid down the ratio that the aggrieved party should not be allowed to
         claim a sum greater than what is specific in the written agreement. But even then,
         the court has powers to reduce the amount if it considers it reasonable to reduce.

3. Breach of Contract-Damages: Section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 lays down
         that when a contract has been broken, the party who suffers by such breach is
         entitled to receive from the party who has broken the contract compensation for any
         loss or damage caused to him thereby which naturally arose in the usual course of
         things from such breach or which the parties knew when they made the contract to
         be likely to result from the breach of it.

         The leading case on this point is "Hadley vs. Baxendale" in which it was decided by
         the Court that the special circumstances under which the contract was actually made
         were communicated by the plaintiff to the defendant, and thus known to both the
         parties to the contract, the damages resulting from the breach of such contract which
         they would reasonably contemplate, would be the amount of injury which would
         ordinarily follow from the breach of contract under these special circumstances so
         known and communicated.

         The problem asked in this question is based on the provisions of Section 73 of the
         Indian Contract Act, 1872. In the instant case `X' had intimated to `Z' that he was
         purchasing water bottles from him for the purpose of performing his contract with
         `Y'. Thus, `Z' had the knowledge of the special circumstances. Therefore, `X' is entitled
         to claim from `Z' ` 500/- at the rate of 0.50 paise i.e. 1000 water bottles x 0.50 paise
         (difference between the procuring price of water bottles and contracted selling price
         to `Y') being the amount of profit `X' would have made by the performance of his
         contract with `Y'.

         If `X' had not informed `Z' of `Y's contract, then the amount of damages would have
         been the difference between the contract price and the market price on the day of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.137

    default. In other words, the amount of damages would be ` 750/- (i.e. 1000 water
    bottles x 0.75 paise).

4.  Section 73 of Indian Contract Act, 1872 provides that when a contract has been

    broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party

    who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him

    thereby, which naturally arose in the usual course of things from such breach, or

    which the parties knew, when they made the contract, to be likely to result from the

    breach of it. But such compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect

    loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach.

    In the instant case, Mr. Chetan filed the suit against Himalayan Travels Pvt. Ltd. for
    damages for the personal inconvenience, hotel charges and medical treatment for his
    wife.

    On the basis of above provisions and facts of the case, it can be said that Mr. Chetan
    can claim damages for the personal inconvenience and hotel charges but not for
    medical treatment for his wife because it is a remote or indirect loss.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
