2.154          BUSINESS LAWS

UNIT ­ 7: CONTRACT OF INDEMNITY AND
                      GUARANTEE

                                            LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:

 Special type of contracts i.e. Indemnity contracts and Guarantee
       contracts and also the nature of obligations and rights of each of
       the parties to the contracts.

 Distinction between contract of indemnity and contract of
       guarantee.

 Mode of discharge of contract of guarantee in various
       circumstances.

UNIT OVERVIEW

                                                   Contract of Indemnity
                                                   Contract of Guarantee

Contract of Indemnity and                          Nature of Surety's Liability
           Guarantee                                 Continuing Guarantee

                                                   Discharge of Surety

                                                   Rights of Surety

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.155

Contract of Indemnity and Guarantee are the specific types of contracts provided under
sections 124 to 147 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. In addition to the specific provisions
(i.e. Section 124 to Section 147 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872), the general principles of
contracts are also applicable to such contracts. Even though both the contracts are modes of
compensation based on similar principles, they differ considerably in several aspects.

In this unit, the law relating to indemnity and guarantee are discussed in detail.

    7.1 CONTRACT OF INDEMNITY

The term "Indemnity" literally means "Security against loss" or "to make good the loss" or
"to compensate the party who has suffered some loss".

The term "Contract of Indemnity" is defined under Section 124 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872. It is "a contract by which one party promises to save the other from loss caused to him
by the conduct of the promisor himself, or by the conduct of any other person."

Example 1: Mr. X contracts with the Government to return to India after completing his
studies (which were funded by the Government) at University of Cambridge and to serve the
Government for a period of 5 years. If Mr. X fails to return to India, he will have to reimburse
the Government. It is a contract of indemnity.

Parties:

a. The party who promises to indemnify/ save the other party from loss- "indemnifier",

b. The party who is promised to be saved against the loss- "indemnified" or "indemnity
       holder".

Example 2: A may contract to indemnify B against the consequences of any proceedings which
C may take against B in respect of a sum of ` 5000/- advanced by C to B. In consequence, when
B who is called upon to pay the sum of money to C fails to do so, C would be able to recover
the amount from A as provided in Section 124.

Example 3: X may agree to indemnify Y for any loss or damage that may occur if a tree on Y's
neighboring property blows over. If the tree then blows over and damages Y's fence, X will be
liable for the cost of fixing the fence.

However, the above definition of indemnity restricts the scope of contracts of indemnity in
as much as it covers only the loss caused by:

(i) the conduct of the promisor himself, or

(ii) the conduct of any other person.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.156  BUSINESS LAWS

Thus, loss occasioned by an accident not caused by any person, or an act of God/ natural
event, is not covered.

In case of Gajanan Moreshwar v/s Moreshwar Madan (1942), decision is taken on the
basis of English Law. As per English Law, Indemnity means promise to save another harmless
from the loss. Here it covers every loss whether due to negligence of promisee or by natural
calamity or by accident.

Mode of contract of indemnity: A contract of indemnity like any other contract may be
express or implied.

a.  A contract of indemnity is said to be express when a person expressly promises to

    compensate the other from loss.

b. A contract of indemnity is said to be implied when it is to be inferred from the
         conduct of the parties or from the circumstances of the case.

A contract of indemnity is like any other contract and must fulfil all the essentials of a valid
contract.

Example 4: A asks B to beat C promising to indemnify him against the consequences. The
promise of A cannot be enforced. Suppose, B beats C and is fined `1000, B cannot claim this
amount from A because the object of the agreement is unlawful.

A contract of Fire Insurance or Marine Insurance is always a contract of indemnity. But there
is no contract of indemnity in case of contract of Life Insurance.

Rights of Indemnity-holder when sued (Section 125): The promisee in a contract of
indemnity, acting within the scope of his authority, is entitled to recover from the
promisor/indemnifier--

(a) all damages which he may be compelled to pay in any suit

(b) all costs which he may have been compelled to pay in bringing/ defending the suit
         and

(c) all sums which he may have paid under the terms of any compromise of suit.

When does the liability of an indemnifier commence?

Although the Indian Contract Act, 1872, is silent on the time of commencement of liability of
indemnifier, however, on the basis of judicial pronouncements it can be stated that the
liability of an indemnifier commences as soon as the liability of the indemnity-holder
becomes absolute and certain. This principle has been followed by the courts in several
cases.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872       2.157

Example 5: A promises to compensate X for any loss that he may suffer by filling a suit
against Y. The court orders X to pay Y damages of ` 10000. As the loss has become certain,
X may claim the amount of loss from A and pass it to Y.

    7.2 CONTRACT OF GUARANTEE

"Contract of guarantee", "surety", "principal debtor" and
"creditor" [Section 126]
Contract of guarantee: A contract of guarantee is a contract to perform the promise made
or discharge the liability, of a third person in case of his default.

Three          Surety- person who gives the guarantee
parties are    Principal debtor- person in respect of whose default the
involved in a  guarantee is given
contract of
guarantee      Creditor- person to whom the gurantee is given

Example 6: When A requests B to lend ` 10,000 to C and guarantees that C will repay the
amount within the agreed time and that on C falling to do so, he (A) will himself pay to B,
there is a contract of guarantee.

Here, B is the creditor, C the principal debtor and A the surety.

Example 7: X and Y go into a car showroom where X says to the dealer to supply latest
model of Wagon R to Y, and agrees that if Y fails to pay he will. In case of Y's failure to pay,
the car showroom will recover its money from X.

This is a contract of guarantee because X promises to discharge the liability of Y in case of
his defaults.

A contract of guarantee is a tripartite agreement between principal debtor, creditor and
surety. There are, in effect three contracts

(i) A principal contract between the principal debtor and the creditor.

(ii) A secondary contract between the creditor and the surety.

(iii) An implied contract between the surety and the principal debtor whereby principal
         debtor is under an obligation to indemnify the surety; if the surety is made to pay or
         perform.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.158                BUSINESS LAWS

The right of surety is not affected by the fact that the creditor has refused to sue the
principal debtor or that he has not demanded the sum due from him.

                                                      Contract of Guarantee
                                                     (Tripartite Agreement)

    Principal                                      Secondary          Implied
    Contract                                        Contract          Contract

    Principal  Creditor  Creditor                  Surety     Surety  Principal
     Debtor                                                            Debtor

ESSENTIAL FEATURES OF A GUARANTEE

The following are the requisites of a valid guarantee:-

1.  Purpose: The purpose of a guarantee being to secure the payment of a debt, the

    existence of recoverable debt is necessary. If there is no principal debt, there can be

    no valid guarantee.

2.  Consideration: Like every other contract, a contract of guarantee should also be

    supported by some consideration. A guarantee without consideration is void, but

    there is no need for a direct consideration between the surety and the creditor.

    As per Section 127 consideration received by the principal debtor is sufficient
    consideration to the surety for giving the guarantee, but past consideration is no
    consideration for the contract of guarantee. Even if the principal debtor is
    incompetent to contract, the guarantee is valid. But, if surety is incompetent to
    contract, the guarantee is void.

    Example 8: B requests A to sell and deliver to him goods on credit. A agrees to do so
    provided C will guarantee the payment of the price of the goods. C promises to
    guarantee the payment in consideration of A `s promise to deliver the goods. As per
    Section 127, there is a sufficient consideration for C's promise. Therefore, the
    guarantee is valid.

    Example 9: A sells and delivers goods to B. C afterwards, without consideration,
    agrees to pay for them in default of B. The agreement is void.

3.  Existence of a liability: There must be an existing liability or a promise whose

    performance is guaranteed. Such liability or promise must be enforceable by law. The

    liability must be legally enforceable and not time barred.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                  2.159

4.  No misrepresentation or concealment (section 142 and 143): Any guarantee

    which has been obtained by the means of misrepresentation made by the creditor, or

    with his knowledge and assent, concerning a material part of the transaction, is

    invalid (section 142)

    Any guarantee which the creditor has obtained by means of keeping silence as to
    material circumstances, is invalid (section 143).

    Example 10: A engages B as clerk to collect money for him. B fails to account for
    some of his receipts, and A in consequence calls upon him to furnish security for his
    duly accounting. C gives his guarantee for B's duly accounting. A does not acquaint
    C, with his previous conduct. B afterwards make default. The guarantee is invalid.

    Example 11: A guarantees to C payment for iron to be supplied by him to B to the
    amount of 2,000 tons. B and C have privately agreed that B should pay rupee five per
    ton beyond the market price, such excess to be applied in liquidation of an old debt.
    This agreement is concealed from A. A is not liable as a surety.

5.  Writing not necessary: Section 126 expressly declares that a guarantee may be

    either oral or written.

6.  Joining of the other co-sureties (Section 144): Where a person gives a guarantee

    upon a contract that the creditor shall not act upon it until another person has joined

    in it as co-surety, the guarantee is not valid if that other person does not join. That

    implies, the guarantee by a surety is not valid if a condition is imposed by a surety

    that some other person must also join as a co-surety, but such other person does not

    join as a co-surety.

    7.3 TYPES OF GUARANTEES

Guarantee may be classified under two categories:

A. Specific Guarantee- A guarantee which extends to a single debt/ specific transaction
         is called a specific guarantee. The surety's liability comes to an end when the
         guaranteed debt is duly discharged or the promise is duly performed.

         Example 12: A guarantees payment to B of the price of the five bags of rice to be
         delivered by B to C and to be paid for in a month. B delivers five bags to C. C pays for
         them. This is a contract for specific guarantee because A intended to guarantee only
         for the payment of price of the first five bags of rice to be delivered one time [Kay v
         Groves]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.160                BUSINESS LAWS

B. Continuing Guarantee [Section 129] - A guarantee which extends to a series of
         transaction is called a continuing guarantee. A surety's liability continues until the
         revocation of the guarantee.

         The essence of continuing guarantee is that it applies not to a specific number of
         transactions but to any number of transactions and makes the surety liable for the
         unpaid balance at the end of the guarantee.

         Example 13: On A's recommendation B, a wealthy landlord employs C as his estate
         manager. It was the duty of C to collect rent on 1st of every month from the tenant of
         B and remit the same to B before 5th of every month. A, guarantee this arrangement
         and promises to make good any default made by C. This is a contract of continuing
         guarantee.

         Example 14: A guarantees payment to B, a tea-dealer, to the amount of
         ` 10,000, for any tea he may from time-to-time supply to C. B supplies C with tea to
         above the value of ` 10,000, and C pays B for it. Afterwards B supplies C with tea to
         the value of ` 20,000. C fails to pay. The guarantee given by A was a continuing
         guarantee, and he is accordingly liable to B to the extent of ` 10,000.

7.4 DISTINCTION BETWEEN A CONTRACT OF
         INDEMNITY AND A CONTRACT OF GUARANTEE

Point of distinction Contract of Indemnity         Contract of Guarantee

Number             of There are only two There are three parties- creditor,
party/parties      to parties namely the principal debtor and surety.
the contract
                         indemnifier [promisor]
                         and the indemnified
                         [promisee]

Nature of liability  The liability of the          The liability of the surety is
                     indemnifier is primary        secondary and conditional as the
                     and unconditional.            primary liability is that of the
                                                   principal debtor.

Time of liability    The liability of the          The liability arises only on the
                     indemnifier arises only       non-performance of an existing
                     on the happening of a         promise or non-payment of an
                     contingency.                  existing debt.

Time to Act          The indemnifier need The surety acts at the request of
                     not act at the request of principal debtor.
                     indemnity holder.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872             2.161

Right to sue third  Indemnifier cannot sue         Surety can proceed against
party               a third party for loss in      principal debtor in his own right
                    his own name as there is       because he gets all the right of a
                    no privity of contract.        creditor after discharging the
                    Such a right would arise       debts.
                    only if there is an
                    assignment in his
                    favour.

Purpose             Reimbursement of loss For the security of the creditor

Competency  to All parties must be In the case of a contract of
contract          competent to contract. guarantee, where a minor is a
                                                       principal debtor, the contract is
                                                       still valid.

    7.5 NATURE AND EXTENT OF SURETY'S LIABILITY
             [SECTION 128]

(i) The liability of the surety is co-extensive with that of the principal debtor unless it is
         otherwise provided by the contract. [Section 128]

(ii) Liability of surety is of secondary nature as he is liable only on default of principal
         debtor.

(iii) Where a debtor cannot be held liable on account of any defect in the document, the
         liability of the surety also ceases.

(iv) A creditor may choose to proceed against a surety first, unless there is an agreement
         to the contrary.

Example 15: A guarantees to B the payment of a bill of exchange by C, the acceptor. The bill
is dishonoured by C. A is liable not only for the amount of the bill but also for any interest
and charges which may have become due on it.

    7.6 LIABILITY OF TWO PERSONS, PRIMARILY
             LIABLE, NOT AFFECTED BY ARRANGEMENT
             BETWEEN THEM THAT ONE SHALL BE SURETY ON
             OTHER'S DEFAULT

Where two persons contract with a third person to undertake a certain liability, and also
contract with each other that one of them shall be liable only on the default of the other,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.162          BUSINESS LAWS

the third person not being a party to such contract, the liability of each of such two persons
to the third person under the first contract is not affected by the existence of the second
contract, although such third person may have been aware of its existence. (Section 132)

Example 16: A and B make a joint and several promissory note to C. A makes it, in fact, as
surety for B, and C knows this at the time when the note is made. The fact that A, to the
knowledge of C, made the note as surety for B, is no answer to a suit by C against A upon
the note.

    7.7 DISCHARGE OF A SURETY

A surety is said to be discharged when his liability as surety comes to an end. The various
modes of discharge of surety are discussed below:
(i) By revocation of the contract of guarantee.
(ii) By the conduct of the creditor, or
(iii) By the invalidation of the contract of guarantee.

                                             Modes of discharge

By revocation                                      By conduct of the  On Invalidation of
                                                         creditor         Contract of
                                                                          Guarantee

By revocation of the Contract of Guarantee

(a) Revocation of continuing guarantee by Notice (Section 130): The continuing
         guarantee may at any time be revoked by the surety as to future transactions by
         notice to the creditors. Once the guarantee is revoked, the surety is not liable for any
         future transaction however he is liable for all the transactions that happened before
         the notice was given.

         A specific guarantee can be revoked only if liability to principal debtor has not
         accrued.

         Example 17: Arun promises to pay Rama for all groceries bought by Carol for a
         period of 12 months if Carol fails to pay. In the next three months, Carol buys
         ` 2000/- worth of groceries. After 3 months, Arun revokes the guarantee by giving a
         notice to Rama. Carol further purchases ` 1000 of groceries. Carol fails to pay. Arun is
         not liable for ` 1000/- of purchase that was made after the notice but he is liable for
         ` 2000/- of purchase made before the notice.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                  2.163

(b) Revocation of continuing guarantee by surety's death (Section 131): In the
         absence of any contract to the contrary, the death of surety operates as a revocation
         of a continuing guarantee as to the future transactions taking place after the death
         of surety. However, the surety's estate remains liable for the past transactions which
         have already taken place before the death of the surety.

         Example 18: `S' guarantees `C' for the transaction to be done between `C' & `P' for
         next month. After 5 days `S' died. Now guarantee is revoked for future transactions
         but `S's estate is still liable for transactions done during previous five days.

(c) By novation [Section 62]: The surety under original contract is discharged if a fresh
         contract is entered into either between the same parties or between the other
         parties, the consideration being the mutual discharge of the old contract.

         Example 19: `S' guarantees `C' for the payment of the supply of wheat to be done by
         `C' & `P' for next month. After 5 days, the contract is changed. Now `S' guarantees `C'
         for the payment of the supply of rice to be done by `C' & `P' for rest of next month.
         Here, guarantee is revoked for supply of wheat. But `S' is still liable for supply of
         wheat done during previous five days.

By conduct of the creditor

(a) By variance in terms of contract (Section 133): Where there is any variance in the
         terms of contract between the principal debtor and creditor without surety's consent,
         it would discharge the surety in respect of all transactions taking place subsequent to
         such variance.

Example 20: A becomes surety to C for B's conduct as a manager in C's bank.
Afterwards, B and C contract, without A's consent, that B's salary shall be raised, and
that he shall become liable for one-fourth of the losses on overdrafts. B allows a
customer to overdraw, and the bank loses a sum of money. A is discharged from his
suretyship by the variance made without his consent and is not liable to make good
this loss.

(b) By release or discharge of principal debtor (Section 134): The surety is discharged
         if the creditor:

i.  enters into a fresh/ new contract with principal debtor; by which the principal

    debtor is released, or

ii. does any act or omission, the legal consequence of which is the discharge of
         the principal debtor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.164        BUSINESS LAWS

Example 21: A contracts with B for a fixed price to build a house for B within a
stipulated time, B supplying the necessary timber. C guarantees A's performance of
the contract. B omits to supply the timber. C is discharged from his suretyship.

Example 22: A gives a guarantee to C for goods to be delivered to B. Later on, B
contracts with C to assign his property to C in lieu of the debt. B is discharged of his
liability and A is discharged of his liability.

(c) Discharge of surety when creditor compounds with, gives time to, or agrees not
         to sue, principal debtor [Sector 135]: A contract between the creditor and the
         principal debtor, by which the creditor makes a composition with, or promises to give
         time to, or promises not to sue, the principal debtor, discharges the surety, unless the
         surety assents to such contract.

i.  Composition: If the creditor makes a composition with the principal debtor,

    without consulting the surety, the latter is discharged. Composition inevitably

    involves variation of the original contract, and, therefore, the surety is

    discharged.

ii. Promise to give time: When the time for the payment of the guaranteed debt
         comes, the surety has the right to require the principal debtor to pay off the
         debt. Accordingly, it is one of the duties of the creditor towards the surety not
         to allow the principal debtor more time for payment.

iii. Promise not to sue: If the creditor under an agreement with the principal
         debtor promises not to sue him, the surety is discharged. The main reason is
         that the surety is entitled at any time to require the creditor to call upon the
         principal debtor to pay off the debt when it is due and this right is positively
         violated when the creditor promises not to sue the principal debtor.

Cases where surety not discharged

i.  Surety not discharged when agreement made with third person to give

    time to principal debtor [Section 136]: Where a contract to give time to the

    principal debtor is made by the creditor with a third person, and not with the

    principal debtor, the surety is not discharged.

    Example 23: C, the holder of an overdue bill of exchange drawn by A as
    surety for B, and accepted by B, contracts with M to give time to B. A is not
    discharged.

ii. Creditor's forbearance to sue does not discharge surety [Section 137]:
         Mere forbearance on the part of the creditor to sue the principal debtor or to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.165

                   enforce any other remedy against him does not in the absence of any
                   provision in the guarantee to the contrary, discharge the surety.

                   Example 24: B owes to C a debt guaranteed by A. The debt becomes payable.
                   C does not sue B for a year after the debt has become payable. A is not
                   discharged from his suretyship.

(d) Discharge of surety by creditor's act or omission impairing surety's eventual
         remedy [Section 139]: If the creditor does any act which is inconsistent with the
         rights of the surety or omits to do any act which his duty to the surety requires him
         to do, and the eventual remedy of the surety himself against the principal debtor is
         thereby impaired, the surety is discharged.

         In a case before the Supreme Court of India, "A bank granted a loan on the security
         of the stock in the godown. The loan was also guaranteed by the surety. The goods
         were lost from the godown on account of the negligence of the bank officials. The
         surety was discharged to the extent of the value of the stock so lost." [State bank of
         Saurashtra V Chitranjan Rangnath Raja (1980) 4 SCC 516]

         Example 25: A puts M as apprentice to B and gives a guarantee to B for M's fidelity.
         B promises on his part that he will, at least once a month, see that M make up the
         cash. B omits to see this done as promised, and M embezzles. A is not liable to B on
         his guarantee.

By the invalidation of the contract of guarantee

(a) Guarantee obtained by misrepresentation [Section 142]: Any guarantee which has
         been obtained by means of misrepresentation made by the creditor, or with his
         knowledge and assent, concerning a material part of the transaction, is invalid.

         Example 26: `C' sells AC to `P' on misrepresenting that it is made of copper while it is
         made of aluminum. `S' guarantees for the same as surety without the knowledge of
         fact that it is made of aluminum. Here, `S' will not be liable.

(b) Guarantee obtained by concealment [Section 143]: Any guarantee which the
         creditor has obtained by means of keeping silence as to material circumstances is
         invalid.

         Example 27: A engages B as a clerk to collect money for him, B fails to account for
         some of his receipts, and A in consequence calls upon him to furnish security for his
         duly accounting. C gives his guarantee for B's duly accounting. A does not acquaint C
         with B's previous conduct. B afterwards makes default. The guarantee is invalid.

         Example 28: A guarantees to C payment for iron to be supplied by him to B for the
         amount of ` 2,00,000 tons. B and C have privately agreed that B should pay five

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.166  BUSINESS LAWS

         rupees per ton beyond the market price, such excess to be applied in liquidation of
         an old debt. This agreement is concealed from A. A is not liable as a surety.

(c) Guarantee on contract that creditor shall not act on it until co-surety joins
         (Section 144): Where a person gives a guarantee upon a contract that the creditor
         shall not act upon it until another person has joined in it as co-surety, the guarantee
         is not valid if that other person does not join.

         Example 29: `S1' guarantees `C' for payment to be done by `P' to `C' on the condition
         that `S1' will be liable only if `S2' joins him for such guarantee. `S2' does not give his
         consent. Here, `S1' will not be liable.

    7.8 RIGHTS OF A SURETY

The surety enjoys the following rights against the creditor:

(a) Rights against the creditor,

(b) Rights against the principal debtor,

(c) Rights against co-sureties.

Right against the principal debtor

(a) Rights of subrogation [Section 140]: Where, a guaranteed debt has become due,
         or default of the principal debtor to perform a guaranteed duty has taken place, the
         surety, upon payment or performance of all that he is liable for, is invested with all
         the rights which the creditor had against the principal debtor.

         This right is known as right of subrogation. It means that on payment of the
         guaranteed debt, or performance of the guaranteed duty, the surety steps into the
         shoes of the creditor.

         Example 30: `Raju' has taken a housing loan from Canara Bank. `Pappu' has given
         guarantee for repayment of such loan. Besides, there was a condition that if `Raju'
         does not repay the loan within time, the bank can auction his property by giving 15
         days notice to `Raju'. On due date `Raju' does not repay, hence Pappu being a surety
         has to repay the loan. Now `Pappu' can take the house from bank and has a right to
         auction the house by giving 15 days notice to `Raju'.

(b) Implied promise to indemnify surety [Section 145]: In every contract of guarantee
         there is an implied promise by the principal debtor to indemnify the surety. The
         surety is entitled to recover from the principal debtor whatever sum he has rightfully
         paid under the guarantee, but not sums which he paid wrongfully.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.167

         Example 31: B is indebted to C and A is surety for the debt. Upon default, C sues A.
         A defends the suit on reasonable grounds but is compelled to pay the amount. A is
         entitled to recover from B the cost as well as the principal debt.

         In the same case above, if A did not have reasonable grounds for defence, A would
         still be entitled to recover principal debt from B but not any other costs.

Right against the Creditor

(a) Surety's right to benefit of creditor's securities [Section 141]: A surety is entitled
         to the benefit of every security which the creditor has against the principal debtor at
         the time when the contract of suretyship is entered into, whether the surety knows of
         the existence of such security or not; and, if the creditor loses, or, without the
         consent of the surety, parts with such security, the surety is discharged to the extent
         of the value of the security.

         Example 32: C advances to B, his tenant, 2,00,000 rupees on the guarantee of A. C
         has also a further security for the 2,00,000 rupees by a mortgage of B's furniture. C
         cancels the mortgage. B becomes insolvent, and C sues A on his guarantee. A is
         discharged from liability to the amount of the value of the furniture.

(b) Right to set off: If the creditor sues the surety, for payment of principal debtor's
         liability, the surety may have the benefit of the set off, if any, that the principal
         debtor had against the creditor

         Example 33: `X' took a loan of ` 50,000 from `Y' which was guaranteed by `Z'. There
         was one another contract between `X' and `Y' in which `Y' had to pay ` 10,000 to `X'.
         On default by `X', `Y' filed suit against `Z'. Now `Z' is liable to pay ` 40,000 (` 50,000 ­
         ` 10,000).

(c) Right to share reduction: The surety has right to claim proportionate reduction in
         his liability if the principal debtor becomes insolvent.

         Example 34: `X' took a loan of ` 50,000 from `Y' which was Guaranteed by `Z'. `X'
         became insolvent and only 25% is realised from his property against liabilities. Now
         `Y' will receive ` 12,500 from `X' and Now `Z' is liable to pay ` 37,500 (` 50,000 ­
         ` 12,500).

Rights against co-sureties

"Co-sureties (meaning)- When the same debt or duty is guaranteed by two
or more persons, such persons are called co-sureties"

(a) Co-sureties liable to contribute equally (Section 146): Unless otherwise agreed,
         each surety is liable to contribute equally for discharge of whole debt or part of the
         debt remains unpaid by debtor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.168  BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 35: A, B and C are sureties to D for the sum of 3,00,000 rupees lent to E. E
         makes default in payment. A, B and C are liable, as between themselves, to pay
         1,00,000 rupees each.

         Example 36: A, B and C are sureties to D for the sum of 1,00,000 rupees lent to E,
         and there is a contract between A, B and C that A is to be responsible to the extent of
         one-quarter, B to the extent of one-quarter, and C to the extent of one- half. E makes
         default in payment. As between the sureties, A is liable to pay 25,000 rupees, B
         25,000 rupees, and C 50,000 rupees.

(b) Liability of co-sureties bound in different sums (Section 147): The principal of
         equal contribution is, however, subject to the maximum limit fixed by a surety to his
         liability. Co-sureties who are bound in different sums are liable to pay equally as far
         as the limits of their respective obligations permit.

         Example 37: A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a
         different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of 1,00,000 rupees, B in that of 2,00,000
         rupees, C in that of 4,00,000 rupees, conditioned for D's duly accounting to E. D
         makes default to the extent of 3,00,000 rupees. A, B and C are each liable to pay
         1,00,000 rupees.

         Example 38: A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a
         different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of 1,00,000 rupees, B in that of 2,00,000
         rupees, C in that of 4,00,000 rupees, conditioned for D's duly accounting to E. D
         makes default to the extent of 4,00,000 rupees; A is liable to pay 1,00,000 rupees, and
         B and C 1,50,000 rupees each.

         Example 39: A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a
         different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of 1,00,000 rupees, B in that of 2,00,000
         rupees, C in that of 4,00,000 rupees, conditioned for D's duly accounting to E. D
         makes default to the extent of 7,00,000 rupees. A, B and C have to pay each the full
         penalty of his bond.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                                                     2.169

SUMMARY

 A contract of indemnity- A contract where one party promises to indemnify the other
       from loss caused to him by the conduct of the promisor or by the conduct of any other
       person.

 A contract of guarantee- A contract of guarantee is a contract to perform the
       promise or discharge the liability of a third person in case of his default. The person
       who gives the guarantee is called the Surety, the person for whom the guarantee is
       given is called the Principal Debtor, and the person to whom the guarantee is given is
       called the Creditor.

 Contract of guarantee must be supported by consideration. The consideration received
       by the principal debtor may be sufficient consideration to the surety for giving
       guarantee.

 The liability of surety is co-extensive with that of principle debtor. In certain cases
       surety will be liable even though the principal debtor is not liable-(i) Principal debtor is
       incompetent to contract. (ii) Principal debtor is adjudged insolvent. (iii) The debts
       become time-barred.

 The rights of a surety can be divided into 3 heads: (i) Right against the principal
       debtor; (ii) Right against the creditor; (iii) Right against the co- sureties.

 The surety is discharged from its liability (i) By revocation of the contract of guarantee.
       (ii) By the conduct of the creditor, or (iii) By the invalidation of the contract of guarantee.

 Specific/simple guarantee: Guarantee for single debt/particular transaction.

 Continuing guarantee: Guarantee that extends to a series of transactions.

                                               CONTRACT OF INDEMNITY

`Indemnify' meaning: To make good the                  Parties to Contract of          Rights of
loss incurred by another person.                                Indemnity             Indemnity

Sec.124 covers the losses caused:                  Indemnifier'- who promises            Holder
i) By the conduct of promisor himself or           to compensate for the loss,
ii) By the conduct of any other person.                                           Right to recover
But as per decision taken in case of Gajanan       `Indemnity Holder' or the
Moreshwar v/s Moreshwar Madan (1942),              `Indemnified' - whose loss is     all damages,
losses by conduct of promisee, or accident,        to be made good                   costs of
or act of God.
                                                                                         suit,
                                                                                     other sums.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               2.170               BUSINESS LAWS

                                      CONTRACT OF GUARANTEE

`Guarantee'             Parties to Contract of         Essential Features
meaning:                        Guarantee
Contract to                                            1. Purpose: To secure the payment of a debt.
perform the            Surety: Who gives the
promise; or            guarantee,                      2. Consideration: Must be there, may be direct or
discharge                                              indirect.
the liability,         Principal Debtor: In
of a third             respect of whose default        3. Existence of liability: Liability must be legally
person in              the guarantee is given,         enforceable, not time barred.
case of his
default.               Creditor: To whom the           4. No misrepresentation or concealment
                       guarantee is given
                                                       5. May be oral or written.

                                                       6. Joining of co-sureties must be if provided in
                                                       contract.

        Types of Guarantee                                         Modes of Discharge of Surety

     Specific              Continue                          By    By Conduct of          On Invalidation of
    Guarantee              Guarantee                   Revocation     Creditors                Contract of
                                                                                               Guarantee

1.        Guarantee    1. Guarantee                1. By Notice,   1. By variance in
                       which extends to                            terms,
which extends to a     a series of                 2. By surety's                         1. Guarantee obtained
                       transaction,                death,          2. By release or       by misrepresentation,
single        debt/                                                discharge of PD,
                                                                                          2. Guarantee obtained
specific                                                           3. Composition with    by concealment,
                                                                   PD,
transaction,           2.         Surety's         3.         By                          3. Guarantee on
                                                                   4. Impairing surety's  contract that creditor
2. Surety's liability  liability                   Novation,       remedy,                shall not act on it until
comes to an end                                                                           co-surety joins
when guaranteed        continues until
debt is duly
discharged.            the revocation

                       of             the

                       guarantee,

                                      Rights of Surety

        Against Principal            Against Creditor                         Against Co-Surities
               Debtor             1. Right to Security
                                  2. Right to Set Off              1. Right to claim contribution
    1.        Right         of    3. Right to share                equally,
                                  reduction
    Subrogation,                                                   2. Right to claim contribution only
                                                                   agreed sum
    2. Right of Indemnity,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.171

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. A contract by which one party promises to save the other from loss caused to him by
         the conduct of the promisor himself or by the conduct of any other person is called
         (a) Surety contract
         (b) Simple contract
         (c) Contract of indemnity
         (d) None of above

2. X, a shareholder of a company lost his share certificate. He applied for the duplicate.
         The company agreed to issue the same on the term that X will compensate the
         company against the loss where any holder produces the original certificate. This is
         called:
         (a) Contract of indemnity
         (b) Contract of Guarantee
         (c) Quasi Contract
         (d) None of the above

3. Section 124 to 125, of the Contract Act, deals with:
         (a) Contracts of indemnity
         (b) Contracts of guarantee
         (c) Both (a) and (b)
         (d) None of above

4. Where `A' obtains housing loan from LIC Housing and if `B' promises to pay LIC
         Housing in the event of `A' failing to repay, it is a contract of-
         (a) Indemnity
         (b) Guarantee
         (c) Wagering
         (d) None of the above

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.172  BUSINESS LAWS

5. A guarantees payment to B of the price of five sacks of flour to be delivered by B to C
         and to be paid for in a month. B delivers five sacks to C. C pays for them. Afterwards B
         delivers four sacks to C, which C does not pay for. Whether-
         (a) A is liable for the price of the four sacks.
         (b) A is not liable for the price of the four sacks.
         (c) A is liable for the price of the two sacks only.
         (d) A is liable for the price of the one sack only.

6. X gives guarantee to the extent of ` 50,000 for the loans given from time to time by A
         to B. A gave a loan of ` 10,000 to B. Afterwards, X gives notice of revocation. Which is
         the correct option?
         (a) X is discharged from all liability to A for any loan granted.
         (b) X is liable to A for ` 10,000 on default of B.
         (c) X is liable to A for ` 50,000 on default of B.
         (d) X is liable to A for ` 40,000 on default of B.

7. The guarantee is valid even if ____ is incompetent to contract:
         (a) Principal Debtor
         (b) Surety
         (c) Both a & b
         (d) None of these

8. Section 143 of the Contract Act 1872 deals with
         (a) Guarantee obtained by free consent
         (b) Guarantee obtained by fraud
         (c) Guarantee obtained by concealment
         (d) None of above

9. A surety has a right of indemnity and right of subrogation against_________
         (a) Principal Debtor
         (b) Creditor
         (c) Co-Sureties
         (d) All of these

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.173

10. In contract of guarantee for whom guarantee given is called

         (a) Surety holder

         (b) Principal debtor

         (c) Both (a) and (b)

         (d) None of above

Descriptive Questions

1. What are the rights of the indemnity-holder when sued?

2. Define contract of indemnity and contract of guarantee and state the conditions when
         guarantee is considered invalid?

3. Mr. X, is employed as a cashier on a monthly salary of ` 12,000 by ABC bank for a
         period of three years. Y gave surety for X's good conduct. After nine months, the
         financial position of the bank deteriorates. Then X agrees to accept a lower salary of
         ` 10,500/- per month from Bank. Two months later, it was found that X has
         misappropriated cash since the time of his appointment. What is the liability of Y?

4. A contracts with B for a fixed price to construct a house for B within a stipulated time.
         B would supply the necessary material to be used in the construction. C guarantees A's
         performance of the contract. B does not supply the material as per the agreement. Is
         C discharged from his liability.

5. Mr. D was in urgent need of money amounting to ` 5,00,000. He asked Mr. K for the
         money. Mr. K lent the money on the sureties of A, B and N without any contract
         between them in case of default in repayment of money by D to K. D makes default in
         payment. B refused to contribute, examine whether B can escape liability?

6. Mr. Chetan was appointed as Site Manager of ABC Constructions Company on a two
         years' contract at a monthly salary of ` 50,000. Mr. Pawan gave a surety in respect of
         Mr. Chetan's conduct. After six months the company was not in position to pay
         ` 50,000 to Mr. Chetan because of financial constraints. Chetan agreed for a lower
         salary of ` 30,000 from the company. This was not communicated to Mr. Pawan. Three
         months afterwards it was discovered that Chetan had been doing fraud since the time
         of his appointment. What is the liability of Mr. Pawan during the whole duration of
         Chetan's appointment.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         2.174        BUSINESS LAWS

7. A agrees to sell goods to B on the guarantee of C for the payment of the price of goods
         in default of B. Is the agreement of guarantee valid in each of the following alternate
         cases:

         Case 1. If A is a Minor

         Case 2: If B is a Minor

         Case 3: If C is a minor.

8. S asks R to beat T and promises to indemnify R against the consequences. R beats T
         and is fined ` 50,000. Can R claim ` 50,000 from S.

9. Manoj guarantees for Ranjan, a retail textile merchant, for an amount of ` 1,00,000, for
         which Sharma, the supplier may from time to time supply goods on credit basis to
         Ranjan during the next 3 months.

         After 1 month, Manoj revokes the guarantee, when Sharma had supplied goods on
         credit for ` 40,000. Referring to the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, decide
         whether Manoj is discharged from all the liabilities to Sharma for any subsequent
         credit supply. What would be your answer in case Ranjan makes default in paying back
         Sharma for the goods already supplied on credit i.e. ` 40,000?

10. 'C' advances to 'B', ` 2,00,000 on the guarantee of 'A'. 'C' has also taken a further
         security for the same borrowing by mortgage of B's furniture worth ` 2,00,000 without
         knowledge of 'A'. C' cancels the mortgage. After 6 months 'B' becomes insolvent and
         'C' 'sues `A' his guarantee. Decide the liability of 'A' if the market value of furniture is
         worth ` 80,000, under the Indian Contract Act, 1872.

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1. (c) 2. (a) 3. (a) 4. (b) 5. (b) 6. (b)

7.  (a)  8.      (c)  9.                           (a) 10. (b)

Answers to the Descriptive Questions

1. Rights of Indemnity- holder when sued (Section 125): The promisee in a contract
         of indemnity, acting within the scope of his authority, is entitled to recover from the
         promisor--

         (a) all damages which he may be compelled to pay in any suit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.175

         (b) all costs which he may have been compelled to pay in bringing/ defending the
                   suit and

         (c) all sums which he may have paid under the terms of any compromise of suit.

         It may be understood that the rights contemplated under section 125 are not
         exhaustive. The indemnity holder/ indemnified has other rights besides those
         mentioned above. If he has incurred a liability and that liability is absolute, he is
         entitled to call upon his indemnifier to save him from the liability and to pay it off.

2. Section 124 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 states that "A contract by which one
         party promises to save the other from loss caused to him by the conduct of the
         promisor himself, or the conduct of any person", is called a "contract of indemnity".

         Section 126 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 states that "A contract to perform the
         promise made or discharge liability incurred by a third person in case of his default"
         is called a "contract of guarantee".

         The conditions under which the guarantee is invalid or void is provided in section
         142, 143 and 144 of the Indian Contract Act. These include:

         (i) Guarantee obtained by means of misrepresentation.

         (ii) Guarantee obtained by means of keeping silence as to material circumstances.

         (iii) When contract of guarantee is entered into on the condition that the creditor
                   shall not act upon it until another person has joined in it as co-surety and that
                   other party fails to join as such.

3. According to section 133 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, where there is any
         variance in the terms of contract between the principal debtor and creditor without
         surety's consent, it would discharge the surety in respect of all transactions taking
         place subsequent to such variance.

         In the instant case, the creditor has made variance (i.e. change in terms) without the
         consent of surety. Thus, surety is discharged as to the transactions subsequent to the
         change.

         Hence, Y is liable as a surety for the loss suffered by the bank due to
         misappropriation of cash by X during the first nine months but not for
         misappropriations committed after the reduction in salary.

4. According to Section 134 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the surety is discharged
         by any contract between the creditor and the principal debtor by which the principal
         debtor is discharged or by any act or omission for the creditor the legal consequence
         of which is the discharge of the principal debtor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.176  BUSINESS LAWS

         In the given case, B omits to supply the necessary construction material. Hence, C is
         discharged from his liability.

5. Co-sureties liable to contribute equally (Section 146 of the Indian Contract act,
         1872): Equality of burden is the basis of Co-suretyship. This is contained in section
         146 which states that "when two or more persons are co-sureties for the same debt,
         or duty, either jointly, or severally and whether under the same or different contracts
         and whether with or without the knowledge of each other, the co-sureties in the
         absence of any contract to the contrary, are liable, as between themselves, to pay
         each an equal share of the whole debt, or of that part of it which remains unpaid by
         the principal debtor".

         Accordingly, on the default of D in payment, B cannot escape from his liability. All the
         three sureties A, B and N are liable to pay equally, in absence of any contract
         between them.

6. As per the provisions of Section 133 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, if the creditor
         makes any variance (i.e. change in terms) without the consent of the surety, then
         surety is discharged as to the transactions subsequent to the change.

         In the instant case, Mr. Pawan is liable as a surety for the loss suffered by ABC
         Constructions company due to misappropriation of cash by Mr. Chetan during the
         first six months but not for misappropriations committed after the reduction in
         salary.

         Hence, Mr. Pawan, will be liable as a surety for the act of Mr. Chetan before the
         change in the terms of the contract i.e., during the first six months. Variation in the
         terms of the contract (as to the reduction of salary) without consent of Mr. Pawan,
         will discharge Mr. Pawan from all the liabilities towards the act of the Mr. Chetan
         after such variation.

7. Case 1: The agreement of guarantee is void because the creditor is incompetent to
         contract.

         Case 2: The agreement of guarantee is valid because the capability of the principal
         debtor does not affect the validity of the agreement of the guarantee.

         Case 3: The agreement of guarantee is void because the surety is incompetent to
         contract.

8. R cannot claim ` 50,000 from S because the object of the agreement was unlawful. A
         contract of indemnity to be valid must fulfil all the essentials of a valid contract.

9. Discharge of Surety by Revocation: As per section 130 of the Indian Contract Act,
         1872, a continuing guarantee may, at any time, be revoked by the surety, as to future

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.177

         transactions, by notice to the creditor, but the surety remains liable for transactions
         already entered into.

         As per the above provisions, liability of Manoj is discharged with relation to all
         subsequent credit supplies made by Sharma after revocation of guarantee, because it
         is a case of continuing guarantee.

         However, liability of Manoj for previous transactions (before revocation) i.e. for
         ` 40,000 remains. He is liable for payment of ` 40,000 to Sharma because the
         transaction was already entered into before revocation of guarantee.

10. Surety's right to benefit of creditor's securities: According to section 141 of the
         Indian Contract Act, 1872, a surety is entitled to the benefit of every security which
         the creditor has against the principal debtor at the time when the contract of
         suretyship is entered into, whether the surety knows of the existence of such security
         or not; and, if the creditor loses, or, without the consent of the surety, parts with such
         security, the surety is discharged to the extent of the value of the security.

         In the instant case, C advances to B, ` 2,00,000 rupees on the guarantee of A. C has
         also taken a further security for ` 2,00,000 by mortgage of B's furniture without
         knowledge of A. C cancels the mortgage. B becomes insolvent, and C sues A on his
         guarantee. A is discharged from liability to the amount of the value of the furniture
         i.e. ` 80,000 and will remain liable for balance ` 1,20,000.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
