         THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                                           2.95

         UNIT­4: PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACT

                                           LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this Chapter, you will be able to understand:
 How obligations under a contract must be carried out by the

       parties.
 Various modes of performance.
 Consequence of refusal of performance or refusal to accept

       performance, by either of the parties.
 Rights of joint promisees, liabilities of joint promisors, and rules

       regarding appropriation of payments.

UNIT OVERVIEW

                       Performance of Contract

By whom  Liability of     Time &                   Performance    Appropriation  Contracts  Discharge
            Joint         Place of                 of Reciprocal   of Payments      which       of a
                       Performance
         Promisor       of Promise                   promises                    need not   Contract
              &                                                                       be

         Promisee                                                                Performed

         Rights of                                 Agreement
            Joint                                     to do

         Promisees                                 Impossible
                                                       Acts

This unit explains who must perform his obligation, what should be the mode of
performance, and what shall be the consequences of non- performance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.96  BUSINESS LAWS

    4.1 PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACT

Meaning: "Performance of Contract" means fulfilment of obligations to the contract.
According to Section 37, the parties to a contract must either perform, or offer to perform,
their respective promises unless such performance is dispensed with or excused under the
provisions of the Contract Act or of any other law.

Types: On the basis of Section 37, "Performance of Contract" may be actual or attempted.

(a) Actual Performance: Where a party to a contract has done what he had undertaken
         to do or either of the parties has fulfilled their obligations under the contract within
         the time and in the manner prescribed.
         Example 1: X borrows ` 5,00,000 from Y with a promise to be paid after 1 month. X
         repays the amount on the due date. This is actual performance.

(b) Offer to perform or attempted performance or tender of performance: It may
         happen sometimes, when the performance becomes due, the promisor offers to
         perform his obligation but the promisee refuses to accept the performance.

         Example 2: A promises to deliver certain goods to B. A takes the goods to the
         appointed place during business hours but B refuses to take the delivery of goods.
         This is an attempted performance as A the promisor has done what he was required
         to do under the contract.

    4.2 CONDITIONS TO BE SATISFIED FOR A VALID
             TENDER OR ATTEMPTED PERFORMANCE

(i) It must be unconditional.

         Example 3: A offers to B to repay only the principal amount of the loan. This is not a
         valid tender since the whole amount of principal and interest is not offered.

(ii) It must be made at proper time and place.

         Example 4: If the promisor wants to deliver the goods at 2 a.m., this is not a valid
         tender unless it was so agreed.

(iii) Reasonable opportunity to examine goods.

         Example 5: A contract's to deliver B at his warehouse 1000 Kgs of wheat on certain
         date. A must bring the wheat to B's warehouse on the appointed day, under such
         circumstances that B may have reasonable opportunity of satisfying himself that the
         thing offered is wheat of the quality contracted for, and that there are 1000 Kgs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.97

(iv) It must be for whole obligation.

         Example 6: X, a singer enters into a contract with Y, the manager of a theatre to sing
         at his theatres two nights in every week during the next two months, and Y engaged
         to pay her ` 10,000 for each night's performance. On the sixth night, X willfully
         absents herself from the theatre. Y is at liberty to put an end to the contract.

         Example 7: A promises to deliver 100 bales of cotton on a certain day. On the
         agreed day and place `A' offers to deliver 80 bales only. This is not a valid tender.

    4.3 BY WHOM A CONTRACT MAY BE PERFORMED

             (SECTION 40, 41 AND 42)

The promise under a contract may be performed, as the circumstances may permit, by the
promisor himself, or by his agent or his legal representative.

1. Promisor himself: If there is something in the contract to show that it was the
         intention of the parties that the promise should be performed by the promisor
         himself, such promise must be performed by the promisor. This means contracts
         which involve the exercise of personal skill or diligence, or which are founded on
         personal confidence between the parties must be performed by the promisor himself.

         Example 8: A promises to paint a picture for B and this must be performed by the
         promisor himself.

2. Agent: Where personal consideration is not the foundation of a contract, the
         promisor or his representative may employ a competent person to perform it.

3. Legal Representatives: A contract which involves the use of personal skill or is
         founded on personal consideration comes to an end on the death of the promisor.
         As regards any other contract the legal representatives of the deceased promisor are
         bound to perform it unless a contrary intention appears from the contract (Section
         37, para 2). But their liability under a contract is limited to the value of the property
         they inherit from the deceased.

         Example 9: A promises to B to pay ` 100,000 on delivery of certain goods. A may
         perform this promise either himself or causing someone else to pay the money to B.
         If A dies before the time appointed for payment, his representative must pay the
         money or employ some other person to pay the money. If B dies before the time
         appointed for the delivery of goods, B's representative shall be bound to deliver the
         goods to A and A is bound to pay `100,000 to B's representative.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.98  BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 10: A promises to paint a picture for B for a certain price. A is bound to
         perform the promise himself. He cannot ask some other painter to paint the picture
         on his behalf. If A dies before painting the picture, the contract cannot be enforced
         either by A's representative or by B.

4. Third persons: Effect of accepting performance from third person- Section 41:
         When a promisee accepts performance of the promise from a third person, he cannot
         afterwards enforce it against the promisor. That is, performance by a stranger, if
         accepted by the promisee, this results in discharging the promisor, although the
         latter has neither authorised not ratified the act of the third party.

         Example 11: A received certain goods from B promising to pay ` 100,000/-. Later on,
         A expressed his inability to make payment. C, who is known to A, pays ` 60,000/- to B
         on behalf of A. However, A was not aware of the payment. Now B is intending to sue
         A for the amount of ` 100,000/-. Therefore, in the present instance, B can sue only for
         the balance amount i.e., ` 40,000/- and not for the whole amount.

5. Joint promisors (Section 42): When two or more persons have made a joint
         promise, then unless a contrary intention appears by the contract, all such persons
         must jointly fulfil the promise. If any of them dies, his legal representatives must,
         jointly with the surviving promisors, fulfil the promise. If all of them die, the legal
         representatives of all of them must fulfil the promise jointly.

         Example 12: `A', `B' and `C' jointly promised to pay ` 6,00,000 to `D'. Here `A', `B' and
         `C' must jointly perform the promise. If `A' dies before performance, then his legal
         representatives must jointly with `B' and `C' perform the promise, and so on. And if all
         the three (i.e. `A', `B' and `C') die before performance, then the legal representatives
         of all must jointly perform the promise.

    4.4 DISTINCTION BETWEEN SUCCESSION AND

             ASSIGNMENT

Distinction between two legal concepts, viz., succession and assignment may be noted carefully.
When the benefits of a contract are succeeded to by process of law, then both burden and
benefits attaching to the contract, may sometimes devolve on the legal heir. Suppose, a son
succeeds to the estate of his father after his death, he will be liable to pay the debts and
liabilities of his father owed during his life-time. But if the debts owed by his father exceed the
value of the estate inherited by the son then he would not be called upon to pay the excess. In
other words, the liability of the son will be limited to the extent of the property inherited by him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.99

In the matter of assignment, however the benefit of a contract can only be assigned but
not the liabilities thereunder. This is because when liability is assigned, a third party gets
involved therein. Thus, a debtor cannot relieve himself of his liability to creditor by assigning
to someone else his obligation to repay the debt.

On the other hand, if a creditor assigns the benefit of a promise, he thereby entitles the
assignee to realise the debt from the debtor but where the benefit is coupled with a liability
or when a personal consideration has entered into the making of the contract then the
benefit cannot be assigned.

    4.5 LIABILITY OF JOINT PROMISOR & PROMISEE

Devolution of joint liabilities (Section 42)

If two or more persons have made a joint promise, ordinarily all of them during their life-
time must jointly fulfil the promise. After death of any one of them, his legal representative
jointly with the survivor or survivors should do so. After the death of the last survivor the
legal representatives of all the original co-promisors must fulfil the promise.

Example 13: X, Y and Z who had jointly borrowed money must, during their life-time jointly
repay the debt. Upon the death of X his representative, say, S along with Y and Z should
jointly repay the debt and so on. If in an accident all the borrowers X, Y and Z dies then their
legal representatives must fulfil the promise and repay the borrowed amount. This rule is
applicable only if the contract reveals no contrary intention.

We have seen that Section 42 deals with voluntary discharge of obligations by joint
promisors. But if they do not discharge their obligation on their own volition, what will
happen? This is what Section 43 resolves.

Any one of joint promisors may be compelled to perform ­ Section 43

When two or more persons make a joint promise, the promisee may, in the absence of
express agreement to the contrary, compel any one or more of such joint promisors to
perform the whole of the promise.

Each promisor may compel contribution ­ Each of two or more joint promisors may
compel every other joint promisor to contribute equally with himself to the performance of
the promise, unless a contrary intention appears from the contract.

In other words, if one of the joint promisors is made to perform the whole contract, he can
call for a contribution from others.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.100  BUSINESS LAWS

Sharing of loss by default in contribution ­ If any one of two or more joint promisors
makes default in such contribution, the remaining joint promisors must bear the loss arising
from such default in equal shares.

Explanation to Section 43

Nothing in this section shall prevent a surety from recovering, from his principal, payments
made by the surety on behalf of the principal, or entitle the principal to recover anything
from the surety on account of payment made by the principal.

Example 14: A, B and C jointly promise to pay D ` 3,00,000. D may compel either A or B or C
to pay him ` 3,00,000.

Example 15: A, B and C are under a joint promise to pay D ` 3,00,000. C is unable to pay
anything A is compelled to pay the whole. A is entitled to receive ` 1,50,000 from B.

Example 16: X, Y and Z jointly promise to pay ` 6,000 to A. A may compel either X or Y or Z
to pay the amount. If Z is compelled to pay the whole amount; X is insolvent but his assets
are sufficient to pay one-half of his debts. Z is entitled to receive ` 1,000 from X's estate
and ` 2,500 from Y.

We thus observe that the effect of Section 43 is to make the liability in the event of a joint
contract, both joint & several, in so far as the promisee may, in the absence of a contract to
the contrary, compel anyone or more of the joint promisors to perform the whole of the
promise.

Effect of release of one joint promisor- Section 44

The effect of release of one of the joint promisors is dealt with in Section 44 which is stated
below:

Where two or more persons have made a joint promise, a release of one of such joint
promisors by the promisee does not discharge the other joint promisor or joint promisors,
neither does it free the joint promisors so released from responsibility to the other joint
promisor or promisors.

Example 17: `A', `B' and `C' jointly promised to pay ` 9,00,000 to `D'. `D' released `A' from
liability. In this case, the release of `A' does not discharge `B' and `C' from their liability. They
remain liable to pay the entire amount of ` 9,00,000 to `D'. And though `A' is not liable to
pay to `D', but he remains liable to pay to `B' and `C' i.e. he is liable to make the contribution
to the other joint promisors.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.101

Rights of Joint Promisees

The law relating to Devolution of joint rights is contained in Section 45 which is reproduced
below:

"When a person has made a promise to two or more persons jointly, then unless a contrary
intention appears from the contract, the right to claim performance rests, as between him
and them, with them during their joint lives, and after the death of any of them, with the
representative of such deceased person jointly with the survivor or survivors, and after the
death of the last survivor, with the representatives of all jointly".

Example 18: A, in consideration of ` 5,00,000 rupees lent to him by B and C, promises B and
C jointly to repay them that sum with interest on a specified day but B dies. In such a case
right to demand payment shall rest with B's legal representatives, jointly with C during C's
life-time, and after the death of C, with the legal representatives of B and C jointly.

    4.6 TIME AND PLACE FOR PERFORMANCE OF THE
             PROMISE

The law on the subject is contained in Sections 46 to 50 explained below:

(i) Time for performance of promise, where no application is to be made and no
         time is specified - Section 46

         Where, by the contract, a promisor is to perform his promise without application by
         the promisee, and no time for performance is specified, the engagement must be
         performed within a reasonable time.

         Explanation to Section 46 - The expression reasonable time is to be interpreted
         having regard to the facts and circumstances of a particular case.

(ii) Time and place for performance of promise, where time is specified and no
         application to be made ­ Section 47

         When a promise is to be performed on a certain day, and the promisor has
         undertaken to perform it without application by the promise, the promisor may
         perform it at any time during the usual hours of business, on such day and the place
         at which the promise ought to be performed.

         Example 19: If the delivery of goods is offered say after 8.30 pm, the promisee may
         refuse to accept delivery, for the usual business hours are over. Moreover, the
         delivery must be made at the usual place of business.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.102  BUSINESS LAWS

(iii) Application for performance on certain day to be at proper time and place ­
         Section 48

         When a promise is to be performed on a certain day, and the promisor has not
         undertaken to perform it without application by the promisee, it is the duty of the
         promisee to apply for performance at a proper place and within the usual hours of
         business.

         Explanation to Section 48 states that the question "what is a proper time and place"
         is, in each particular case, a question of fact.

(iv) Place for the performance of promise, where no application to be made and no
         place fixed for performance - Section 49

         When a promise is to be performed without application by the promisee, and no
         place is fixed for the performance of it, it is the duty of the promisor to apply to the
         promisee to appoint a reasonable place for the performance of the promise, and to
         perform it at such a place.

         Example 20: A undertakes to deliver a thousand maunds of jute to B on a fixed day.
         A must apply to B to appoint a reasonable place for the purpose of receiving it, and
         must deliver it to him at such place.

(v) Performance in manner or at time prescribed or sanctioned by promisee -
         Section 50

         The performance of any promise may be made in any such manner, or at any time
         which the promisee prescribes or sanctions.

    4.7 PERFORMANCE OF RECIPROCAL PROMISE

The law on the subject is contained in Sections 51 to 58. The provisions thereof are
summarized below:

(i) Promisor not bound to perform, unless reciprocal promisee ready and willing to
         perform- Section 51

         When a contract consists of reciprocal promises to be simultaneously performed, no
         promisor needs to perform his promise unless the promisee is ready and willing to
         perform his reciprocal promise.

         Example 21: A and B contract that A shall deliver the goods to B to be paid for by B
         on delivery. A need not deliver the goods, unless B is ready and willing to pay for the
         goods on delivery.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.103

(ii) Order of performance of reciprocal promises- Section 52

         When the order of performance of the reciprocal promises is expressly fixed by the
         contract, they shall be performed in that order; and where the order is not expressly
         fixed by the contract, they shall be performed in that order which the nature of the
         transaction requires.

         Example 22: A and B contract that A shall build a house for B at a fixed price. A's
         promise to build the house must be performed before B's promise to pay for it.

(iii) Liability of party preventing event on which the contract is to take effect ­
         Section 53

         When a contract contains reciprocal promises, and one party to the contract prevents
         the other from performing his promise, the contract becomes voidable at the option
         of the party so prevented; and he is entitled to compensation from the other party
         for any loss he may sustain in consequence of the non- performance of the contract.

         Example 23: A and B contract that B shall execute some work for A for a thousand
         rupees. B is ready and willing to execute the work accordingly, but A prevents him
         from doing so. The contract is voidable at the option of B; and if he elects to rescind
         it, he is entitled to recover from A compensation for any loss which he has incurred
         by its non-performance.

         Example 24: In a contract for the sale of standing timber, the seller is to cut and cord
         it, whereupon buyer is to take it away and pay for it. The seller cords only a part of
         the timber and neglects to cord the rest. In that event the buyer may avoid the
         contract and claim compensation from the seller for any loss which he may have
         sustained for the non-performance of the contract.

(iv) Effect of default as to that promise which should be first performed, in contract
         consisting of reciprocal promises (Section 54)

         Section 54 applies when the promises are reciprocal and dependent. If the promisor
         who has to perform his promise before the performance of the other's promise fails
         to perform it, he cannot claim performance of the other's promise, and is also liable
         for compensation for his non- performance.

         Example 25: A hires B's ship to take in and convey, from Kolkata to the Mauritius, a
         cargo to be provided by A, B receiving a certain freight for its conveyance. A does
         not provide any cargo for the ship. A cannot claim the performance of B's promise,
         and must make compensation to B for the loss which B sustains by the non-
         performance of the contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.104  BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 26: A hires B to make a shoe rack. A will supply the plywood, fevicol and
         other items required for making the shoe rack. B arrived on the appointed day and
         time but A could not arrange for the required materials. A cannot claim the
         performance of B's promise, and must make compensation to B for the loss which B
         sustains by the non-performance of the contract.

(v) Effects of Failure to Perform at a Time Fixed in a Contract in which Time is
         Essential (Section 55)

         The law on the subject is contained in Section 55 which is reproduced below:

         "When a party to a contract promises to do certain thing at or before the specified
         time, and fails to do any such thing at or before the specified time, the contract, or
         so much of it as has not been performed, becomes voidable at the option of the
         promisee, if the intention of the parties was that time should be of essence of the
         contract".

         Effect of such failure when time is not essential

         If it was not the intention of the parties that time should be of essence of the
         contract, the contract does not become voidable by the failure to do such thing at or
         before the specified time; but the promisee is entitled to compensation from the
         promisor for any loss occasioned to him by such failure.

         Effect of acceptance of performance at time other than agreed upon -

         If, in case of a contract voidable on account of the promisor's failure to perform his
         promise at the time agreed, the promisee accepts performance of such promise at
         any time other than agreed, the promisee cannot claim compensation for any loss
         occasioned by the non-performance of the promise at the time agreed, unless, at the
         time of acceptance, he gives notice to the promisor of his intention to do so.

(vi) Agreement to do Impossible Act (Section 56)

         The impossibility of performance may be of the two types, namely (a) initial
         impossibility, and (b) subsequent impossibility.

         (a) Initial Impossibility (Impossibility existing at the time of contract): When
                   the parties agree upon doing of something which is obviously impossible in
                   itself the agreement would be void. Impossible in itself means impossible in
                   the nature of things. The fact of impossibility may be and may not be known
                   to the parties.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.105

         Example 27: `A', a Hindu, who was already married, contracted to marry `B', a
         Hindu girl. According to law, `A' being married, could not marry `B'. In this
         case, `A' must make compensation to `B' for the loss caused to her by the
         non-performance of the contract.

         (1) If known to the parties: It would be observed that an agreement
                   constituted, quite unknown to the parties, may be impossible of
                   being performed and hence void.

                   Example 28: B promises to pay a sum of ` 5,00,000 if he is able to
                   swim across the Indian Ocean from Mumbai to Aden within a week. In
                   this case, there is no real agreement, since both the parties are quite
                   certain in their mind that the act is impossible of achievement.
                   Therefore, the agreement, being impossible in itself, is void.

         (2) If unknown to the parties: Where both the promisor and the
                   promisee are ignorant of the impossibility of performance, the
                   contract is void.

                   Example 29: A contracted B to sell his brown horse for ` 2,50,000
                   both unaware that the horse was dead a day before the agreement.

         (3) If known to the promisor only: Where at the time of entering into a
                   contract, the promisor alone knows about the impossibility of
                   performance, or even if he does not know though he should have
                   known it with reasonable diligence, the promisee is entitled to claim
                   compensation for any loss he suffered on account of non-
                   performance.

(b) Subsequent or Supervening impossibility (Becomes impossible after
         entering into contract): When performance of promise become impossible
         or illegal by occurrence of an unexpected event or a change of circumstances
         beyond the contemplation of parties, the contract becomes void e.g. change
         in law etc. In other words, sometimes, the performance of a contract is quite
         possible when it is made. But subsequently, some event happens which
         renders the performance impossible or unlawful. Such impossibility is called
         the subsequent or supervening. It is also called the post-contractual
         impossibility. The effect of such impossibility is that it makes the contract
         void, and the parties are discharged from further performance of the contract.

         Example 30: `A' and `B' contracted to marry each other. Before the time fixed
         for the marriage, `A' became mad. In this case, the contract becomes void due
         to subsequent impossibility, and thus discharged.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.106  BUSINESS LAWS

(vii) Reciprocal promise to do certain things that are legal, and also some other
         things that are illegal- Section 57

         Where persons reciprocally promise, first to do certain things which are legal and
         secondly, under specified circumstances, to do certain other things which are illegal,
         the first set of promises is a valid contract, but the second is a void agreement.

         Example 31: A and B agree that A will sell a house to B for ` 50,00,000 and also that
         if B uses it as a gambling house, he will pay a further sum of ` 75,00,000. The first set
         of reciprocal promises, i.e. to sell the house and to pay ` 50,00,000 for it, constitutes
         a valid contract. But the object of the second, being unlawful, is void.

(viii) `Alternative promise' one branch being illegal- Section 58

         The law on this point is contained in Section 58 which says that "In the case of the
         alternative promise, one branch of which is legal and the other illegal, the legal
         branch alone can be enforced".

         Example 32: A and B agree that A shall pay B ` 1,00,000, for which B shall afterwards
         deliver to A either rice or smuggled opium.

         This is a valid contract to deliver rice, and a void agreement as to the opium.

    4.8 APPROPRIATION OF PAYMENTS

Sometimes, a debtor owes several debts to the same creditor and makes payment, which is
not sufficient to discharge all the debts. In such cases, the payment is appropriated (i.e.
adjusted against the debts) as per Section 59 to 61 of the Indian Contract Act.

(i) Application of payment where debt to be discharged is indicated (Section 59):
         Where a debtor, owing several distinct debts to one person, makes a payment to him
         either with express intimation or under circumstances implying that the payment is to
         be applied to the discharge of some particular debt, the payment, if accepted, must
         be applied accordingly.

(ii) Application of payment where debt to be discharged is not indicated (Section
         60): Where the debtor has omitted to intimate and there are no other circumstances
         indicating to which debt the payment is to be applied the creditor may apply it at his
         discretion to any lawful debt actually due and payable to him from the debtor, where
         its recovery is or is not barred by the law in force for the time being as to the
         limitation of suits. However, he cannot apply the payment to the disputed debt.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.107

(iii) Application of payment where neither party appropriates (Section 61): Where
         neither party makes any appropriation, the payment shall be applied in discharge of
         the debts in order of time, whether they are or are not barred by the law in force for
         the time being as to the limitation of suits. If the debts are of equal standing, the
         payments shall be applied in discharge of each proportionately.

    4.9 CONTRACTS, WHICH NEED NOT BE PERFORMED ­

             WITH THE CONSENT OF BOTH THE PARTIES

Under this heading, we shall discuss the principles of Novation, Rescission and Alteration.
The law is contained in Sections 62 to 67 of the Contract Act.

(i) Effect of novation, rescission, and alteration of contract (Section 62)

         "If the parties to a contract agree to substitute a new contract for it, or to rescind or
         alter it, the original contract need not be performed".

         Analysis of Section 62

         (a) Effect of novation: The parties to a contract may substitute a new contract
                   for the old. If they do so, it will be a case of novation. On novation, the old
                   contract is discharged and consequently it need not be performed. Thus, it is
                   a case where there being a contract in existence some new contract is
                   substituted for it either between the same parties or between different parties
                   the consideration mutually being the discharge of old contract. Novation can
                   take place only by mutual agreement between the parties.

                   Example 33: A owes B ` 100,000. A, B and C agree that C will pay B and he
                   will accept ` 100,000 from C in lieu of the sum due from A. A's liability thereby
                   shall come to an end, and the old contract between A and B will be
                   substituted by the new contract between B and C.

         (b) Effect of rescission: A contract is also discharged by rescission. When the
                   parties to a contract agree to rescind it, the contract need not be performed.
                   In the case of rescission, only the old contract is cancelled and no new
                   contract comes to exist in its place. It is needless to point out that novation
                   also involves rescission. Both in novation and in rescission, the contract is
                   discharged by mutual agreement.

         (c) Effect of alteration of contract: As in the case of novation and rescission, so
                   also in a case where the parties to a contract agree to alter it, the original
                   contract is rescinded, with the result that it need not be performed. In other

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.108  BUSINESS LAWS

                   words, a contract is also discharged by alteration. The terms of contract may
                   be so altered by mutual agreement that the alteration may have the effect of
                   substituting a new contract for the old one. In other words, the distinction
                   between novation and alteration is very slender.

                   Novation and alteration: The law pertaining to novation and alteration is
                   contained in Sections 62 to 67 of the Indian Contract Act. In both these cases
                   the original contract need not be performed. Still there is a difference
                   between these two.

                   1. Novation means substitution of an existing contract with a new one.
                             Novation may be made by changing in the terms of the contract or
                             there may be a change in the contracting parties. But in case of
                             alteration the terms of the contract may be altered by mutual
                             agreement by the contracting parties but the parties to the contract
                             will remain the same.

                   2. In case of novation there is altogether a substitution of new contract
                             in place of the old contract. But in case of alteration it is not essential
                             to substitute a new contract in place of the old contract. In alteration,
                             there may be a change in some of the terms and conditions of the
                             original agreement.

(ii) Promisee may waive or remit performance of promise (Section 63): "Every
         promisee may dispense with or remit, wholly or in part, the performance of the
         promise made to him, or may extend the time for such performance or may accept
         instead of it any satisfaction which he thinks fit". In other words, a contract may be
         discharged by remission.

         Example 34: A owes B `5,00,000. A pays to B, and B accepts, in satisfaction of the
         whole debt, ` 2,00,000 paid at the time and place at which the ` 5,00,000 were
         payable. The whole debt is discharged.

(iii) Restoration of Benefit under a Voidable Contract (Section 64)

         The law on the subject is "When a person at whose option a contract is voidable
         rescinds it, the other party thereto need not perform any promise therein contained
         in which he is the promisor. The party rescinding avoidable contract shall, if he has
         received any benefit thereunder from another party to such contract, restore such
         benefit, so far as may be, to the person from whom it was received".

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.109

         Analysis of Section 64

         Such a contract can be terminated at the option of the party who is empowered to
         do so. If he has received any benefit under the contract, he must restore such benefit
         to the person from whom he has received it.

         Example 35: An insurance company may rescind a policy on the ground that material
         fact has not been disclosed. When it does so, the premium collected by it in respect
         of the policy reduced by the amount of expenses incurred by it in this connection
         must be repaid to the policy holder.

(iv) Obligations of Person who has Received Advantage under Void Agreement or
         contract that becomes void (Section 65)

         "When an agreement is discovered to be void or when a contract becomes void, any
         person who has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is bound
         to restore it, or to make compensation for it to the person from whom he received
         it."

         Analysis of Section 65

         From the language of the Section, it is clear that in such a case either the advantage
         received must be restored back or a compensation, sufficient to put the position
         prior to contract, should be paid.

         Example 36: A pays B ` 1,00,000, in consideration of B's promising to marry C, A's
         daughter. C is dead at the time of the promise. The agreement is void, but B must
         repay A ` 1,00,000.

         In a case, the plaintiff hired a godown from the defendant for twelve months and
         paid the whole of the rent in advance. After about seven months the godown was
         destroyed by fire, without any fault or negligence on the part of the plaintiff and the
         plaintiff claimed a refund of a proportionate amount of the rent. Held, the plaintiff
         was entitled to recover the rent for the unexpired term, of the contract.

         The Act requires that a party must give back whatever he has received under the
         contract. The benefit to be restored under this section must be benefit received
         under the contract (and not any other amount). A agrees to sell land to B for
         ` 400,000. B pays to A ` 40,000 as a deposit at the time of the contract, the amount
         to be forfeited by A if B does not complete the sale within a specified period. B fails
         to complete the sale within the specified period, nor is he ready and willing to
         complete the sale within a reasonable time after the expiry of that period. A is
         entitled to rescind the contract and to retain the deposit. The deposit is not a benefit

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.110  BUSINESS LAWS

         received under the contract, it is a security that the purchaser would fulfil his contract
         and is ancillary to the contract for the sale of the land.

(v) Communication of rescission (Section 66): You have noticed that a contract
         voidable at the option of one of the parties can be rescinded; but rescission must be
         communicated to the other party in the same manner as a proposal is communicated
         under Section 4 of the Contract Act. Similarly, a rescission may be revoked in the
         same manner as a proposal is revoked.

(vi) Effects of neglect of promisee to afford promisor reasonable facilities for
         performance (Section 67): If any promisee neglects or refuses to afford the
         promisor reasonable facilities for the performance of his promise, the promisor is
         excused by such neglect or refusal as to any non-performance caused thereby.

         Example 37: If an apprentice refuses to learn, the teacher cannot be held liable for
         not teaching.

         Example 38: A contracts with B to repair B's house. B neglects or refuses to appoint
         out to A the places in which his house requires repair. A is excused for the non-
         performance of the contract, if it is caused by such neglect or refusal.

    4.10 DISCHARGE OF A CONTRACT

A contract is discharged when the obligations created by it come to an end. A contract may
be discharged in any one of the following ways:

(i) Discharge by performance: It takes place when the parties to the contract fulfil their
         obligations arising under the contract within the time and in the manner prescribed.
         Discharge by performance may be

         (1) Actual performance; or

         (2) Attempted performance.

         Actual performance is said to have taken place, when each of the parties has done
         what he had agreed to do under the agreement. When the promisor offers to
         perform his obligation, but the promisee refuses to accept the performance, it
         amounts to attempted performance or tender.

         Example 39: A contracts to sell his car to B on the agreed price. As soon as the car is
         delivered to B and B pays the agreed price for it, the contract comes to an end by
         performance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.111

         Example 40: A contracted to supply certain quantity of timber to B. B made the
         supply of timber at appointed time and place but A refused to accept the delivery.
         This is called as attempted performance.

(ii) Discharge by mutual agreement: Section 62 of the Indian Contract Act provides if
         the parties to a contract agree to substitute a new contract for it, or to rescind or
         remit or alter it, the original contract need not be performed. The principles of
         Novation, Rescission, Alteration and Remission are already discussed.

         Example 41: A owes B ` 1,00,000. A enters into an agreement with B and mortgage
         his (A's), estates for ` 50,000 in place of the debt of ` 1,00,000. This is a new contract
         and extinguishes the old.

         Example 42: A owes B ` 5,00,000. A pays to B ` 3,00,000 who accepts it in full
         satisfaction of the debt. The whole is discharged.

(iii) Discharge by impossibility of performance: The impossibility may exist from the
         very start. In that case, it would be impossibility ab initio. Alternatively, it may
         supervene. Supervening impossibility may take place owing to:

         (a) an unforeseen change in law;

         (b) the destruction of the subject-matter essential to that performance;

         (c) the non-existence or non-occurrence of particular state of things, which was
                   naturally contemplated for performing the contract, as a result of some
                   personal incapacity like dangerous malady;

         (d) the declaration of a war (Section 56).

         Example 43: A agrees with B to discover a treasure by magic. The agreement is void
         due to initial impossibility.

         Example 44: A and B contract to marry each other. Before the time fixed for the
         marriage, A goes mad. The contract becomes void.

         Example 45: A contracts to act at a theatre for six months in consideration of a sum
         paid in advance by B. On several occasions A is too ill to act. The contract to act on
         those occasions becomes void.

         Example 46: X agrees to sell his horse to Y for ` 5,000 but the horse died in an
         accident. Here, it become impossible to perform the contract due to destruction of
         the subject. Thus, a valid contract changes into void contract because of impossibility
         of performance.

(iv) Discharge by lapse of time: A contract should be performed within a specified
         period as prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963. If it is not performed and if no

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        2.112  BUSINESS LAWS

        action is taken by the promisee within the specified period of limitation, he is
        deprived of remedy at law.

        Example 47: If a creditor does not file a suit against the buyer for recovery of the
        price within three years, the debt becomes time-barred and hence irrecoverable.

(v) Discharge by operation of law: A contract may be discharged by operation of law
         which includes by death of the promisor, by insolvency etc.

(vi) Discharge by breach of contract: Breach of contract may be actual breach of
         contract or anticipatory breach of contract. If one party defaults in performing his
         part of the contract on the due date, he is said to have committed breach thereof.
         When on the other hand, a person repudiates a contract before the stipulated time
         for its performance has arrived, he is deemed to have committed anticipatory breach.
         If one of the parties to a contract breaks the promise the party injured thereby, has
         not only a right of action for damages but he is also discharged from performing his
         part of the contract.

        Example 48: A contracted with B to supply 100 kgs of rice on 1st June. But A failed to
        deliver the same on said date. This is actual breach of contract. If time is not essential
        essence of contract B can give him another date for supply of goods and he will not
        be liable to claim for any damages if prior notice for the same is not given to A while
        giving another date.

(vii) Promisee may waive or remit performance of promise: Every promisee may
         dispense with or remit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise made to
         him, or may extend the time for such performance or may accept instead of it any
         satisfaction which he thinks fit. In other words, a contract may be discharged by
         remission. (Section 63)

        Example 49: A owes B ` 5,00,000. C pays to B `1,00,000 and B accepts them, in
        satisfaction of his claim on A. This payment is a discharge of the whole claim.

(viii)  Effects of neglect of promisee to afford promisor reasonable facilities for
        performance: If any promisee neglects or refuses to afford the promisor reasonable
        facilities for the performance of his promise, the promisor is excused by such neglect
        or refusal as to any non-performance caused thereby. (Section 67)

(ix) Merger of rights: Sometimes, the inferior rights and the superior rights coincide and
         meet in one and the same person. In such cases, the inferior rights merge into the
         superior rights. On merger, the inferior rights vanish and are not required to be
         enforced.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.113

    Example 50: A took a land on lease from B. Subsequently, A purchases that very
    land. Now, A becomes the owner of the land and the ownership rights being superior
    to rights of a lessee, the earlier contract of lease stands terminated.

SUMMARY

1.  The promisor or his representative must perform unless the nature of contract shows

    that it may be performed by a third person, but the promisee may accept

    performance by a third party. (Sections 37, 40 and 41)

2.  In case of joint promisors, all must perform, and after the death of any of them, the

    survivors and the representatives of the deceased must perform. But their liability is

    joint and several. If the promisee requires any one of them perform the whole

    promise, he can claim contribution from others. (Sections 42, 43 and 44)

3.  Joint promisees have only a joint right to claim performance. (Section 45)

4.  The promisor must offer to perform and such offer must be unconditional, and be

    made at the proper time and place, allowing the promisee a reasonable opportunity

    of inspection of the things to be delivered. (Sections 38, 46, 47, 48, 49 and 50)

5.  If the performance consists of payment of money and there are several debts to be

    paid, the payment shall be appropriated as per provisions of Sections 59, 60 and 61.

    The debtor has, at the time of payment, the right of appropriating the payment. In

    default of debtor, the creditor has option of election and in default of either the law

    will allow appropriation of debts in order of time.

6.  If an offer of performance is not accepted, the promisor is not responsible for non-

    performance and does not lose his rights under the contract; so also, if the promisee

    fails to afford reasonable facilities. He may sue for specific performance or he may

    avoid the contract and claim compensation (Sections 38, 39, 53 and 67).

7.  Rescission is communicated and revoked in the same way as a promise. The effect is

    to dispense with further performance and to render the party rescinding liable to

    restore any benefit he may have received. (Sections 64 and 66)

8.  Parties may agree to cancel the contract or to alter it or to substitute a new contract

    for it. (Section 62)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                 2.114          BUSINESS LAWS

                                PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS (SEC.37)

Meaning: Fulfillment Condition                       By Whom                     Performance of Joint Promises

of obligations to for a Valid 1. Promisor himself                                1. All joint promisors are liable

contract                Tender                     2. Agent: Where contract jointly and severally. However

          Types         Performance doesn't involve personal Contract may provide otherwise.

(i) Actual: Party actually 1.Must be skills.                                     2. In case of death of any joint

fulfills the obligation. unconditional. 3. Legal Representative: In promisor, legal representative

(ii) Tender Performance 2.At proper case of death of promisor. with surviving joint promisors

(Sec. 38): Promisor time & Place. However, if contract jointly fulfill the promise.

offers to perform his 3.Reasonable involves personal skill, it 3. One has right of contribution

obligation under the opportunity comes to an end with death from others.

contract at the proper to examine of promisor.                                   4. If one of the joint promisors is

time and place but the goods.                      4. Third persons: When released, he is responsible to the

promisee refuses to 4. For whole promisee                     accepts other joint promisor or

accept           the obligation.                   performance from a third promisors.

performance.                                       person, he cannot afterward

                                                   enforce it against promisor.

Time place and manner: As decided otherwise during business hours at business place or residence of

promise.

      Performance of Reciprocal Promises                   Appropriation of         Contracts which need not
                                                     Payment (Adjustment of                 be performed
1. Mutual and Concurrent- Promises have to            Payment Against Debt)
be simultaneously performed.                                                        1. If the parties mutually
                                                     Rule 1: Appropriation by       agree to substitute the
2. Mutual and Dependent-If the promisor, who         Debtor-if accepted, must       original contract by a new
must perform, fails to perform it, he cannot         be applied to that debt.       one or to rescind or alter it.
claim the performance of the reciprocal
promise.                                             Rule 2: Appropriation by       2. If the promise dispenses
                                                     Creditor-Debtor does not       with or remits, wholly or in
3. Mutual and Independent- Each party must           intimate, the creditor may     part the performance of
perform his promise without waiting for the          apply it at his discretion to  the promise made to or
performance or readiness to perform on the           any lawful debt including a    extends the time for such
part of the other.                                   time-barred debt. (But not     performance or accepts
                                                     to a disputed debt)            any satisfaction for it.
Note1: Where contract is not complete in time
&:-                                                  Rule 3: Where neither          3. If the person, at whose
                                                     party appropriates ­           option the contract is
(a) Time is essential ­ Contract is voidable.        neither party makes any        voidable, rescinds it.
                                                     appropriation the payment
(b) Time is not essential ­ Contract not voidable    is to be applied in            4. If the promisee neglects
but compensation is there.                           discharge of the debts in      or refuses.
                                                     order of time, including
Note2: Contract to do impossible act is void.        time-barred debts. If the      5. If it is illegal.
                                                     debts are equal the
Note3: Reciprocal promises to do things legal        payment is to be applied
and also other things illegal-first set of promises  proportionately.
is a contract but second is a void agreement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.115

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. On the valid performance of the contractual obligations by the parties, the contract
         (a) Is discharged
         (b) becomes enforceable
         (c) becomes void
         (d) None of these

2. Which of the following person can perform the contract?
         (a) Promisor alone
         (b) Legal representatives of promisor
         (c) Agent of the promisor
         (d) All of these.

3. A contract is discharged by novation which means the
         (a) cancellation of the existing contract
         (b) change in one or more terms of the contract
         (c) substitution of existing contract for a new one
         (d) none of these

4. A contract is discharged by rescission which means the
         (a) change in one or more terms of the contract
         (b) acceptance of lesser performance
         (c) abandonment of rights by a party
         (d) cancellation of the existing contract

5. If a person accepts a lesser sum of money than what was contracted for in discharge of
         the whole debt, it is known as:
         (a) Waiver
         (b) Rescission
         (c) Alteration
         (d) Remission

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.116  BUSINESS LAWS

6. Novation discharges a contract
         (a) No, it means, no new contract comes to existence
         (b) No, it means, new contract comes to existence, but old contract is not
                   discharged
         (c) Yes, on novation, old contract is discharged and consequently it need not be
                   performed
         (d) Yes, but only if parties agreed to discharge.

7. Novation and alteration are same
         (a) True, both result in discharging old contract.
         (b) False, novation discharges old contract, in alteration, the obligation remains.
         (c) False, however, both may have the effect of substituting a new contract for the
                   old one
         (d) None of the above

8. A, B and C jointly promised to pay ` 60,000 to D. before performance of the contract, C
         dies. Here, the contract
         (a) Becomes void on C's death
         (b) Should be performed by A and B along with C's legal representatives
         (c) Should be performed by A and B alone
         (d) Should be renewed between A, B and D.

9. Vivaan lives on rent in a house owned by Swasti. Later he purchases the house from
         Swasti. The rent agreement is discharged due to:
         (a) Waiver of rights
         (b) Novation of contract
         (c) Merger of rights
         (d) Remission of contract

10. When prior to the due date of performance, the promisor refuses to perform the
         contract, it is known as:
         (a) Novation of the contract
         (b) Anticipatory breach of contract

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.117

         (c) Actual breach of contract
         (d) waiver of contract
11. A owes ` 15000 to B. A die leaving his estate of ` 12000. Legal representatives of A are:
         (a) liable to pay ` 12000 to B
         (b) liable to pay ` 15000 to B
         (c) not liable to pay B
         (d) liable to pay ` 3000 to B
12. Rani contracted to teach dance to Shruti. Shruti paid an advance of ` 5000 for the
         same. Rani met with an accident and will not be able to dance. She has a daughter as
         her legal representative. Shruti can
         (a) force her daughter to teach her dance
         (b) rescind the contract and ask for refund of money
         (c) rescind the contract but cannot ask for refund
         (d) can sue Rani for non-performance of contract

Descriptive Questions

1. X, Y and Z jointly borrowed ` 50,000 from A. The whole amount was repaid to A by Y.
         Decide in the light of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 whether:
         (i) Y can recover the contribution from X and Z,
         (ii) Legal representatives of X are liable in case of death of X,
         (iii) Y can recover the contribution from the assets, in case Z becomes insolvent.

2. Mr. Rich aspired to get a self-portrait made by an artist. He went to the workshop of
         Mr. C an artist and asked whether he could sketch the former's portrait on oil painting
         canvass. Mr. C agreed to the offer and asked for ` 50,000 as full advance payment for
         the above creative work. Mr. C clarified that the painting shall be completed in 10
         sittings and shall take 3 months.
         On reaching to the workshop for the 6th sitting, Mr. Rich was informed that Mr. C
         became paralyzed and would not be able to paint for near future. Mr. C had a son Mr.
         K who was still pursuing his studies and had not taken up his father's profession yet?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    2.118  BUSINESS LAWS

    Discuss in light of the Indian Contract Act, 1872?

    (i) Can Mr. Rich ask Mr. K to complete the artistic work in lieu of his father?

    (ii) Could Mr. Rich ask Mr. K for refund of money paid in advance to his father?

3. Mr. JHUTH entered into an agreement with Mr. SUCH to purchase his (Mr. SUCH's)
         motor car for ` 5,00,000/- within a period of three months. A security amount of
         ` 20,000/- was also paid by Mr. JHUTH to Mr. SUCH in terms of the agreement. After
         completion of three months of entering into the agreement, Mr. SUCH tried to contract
         Mr. JHUTH to purchase the car in terms of the agreement. Even after lapse of another
         three month period, Mr. JHUTH neither responded to Mr. SUCH, nor to his phone calls.
         After lapse of another period of six months. Mr. JHUTH contracted Mr. SUCH and
         denied to purchase the motor car. He also demanded back the security amount of `
         20,000/- from Mr. SUCH. Referring to the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872,
         state whether Mr. SUCH is required to refund the security amount to Mr. JHUTH.

    Also examine the validity of the claim made by Mr. JHUTH, if the motor car would have
    destroyed by an accident within the three month's agreement period.

4.  Mr. Murari owes payment of 3 bills to Mr. Girdhari as on 31st March, 2022.

    (i) ` 12,120 which was due in May 2018. (ii) ` 5,650 which was due in August 2020 (iii)

    ` 9,680 which was due in May 2021. Mr. Murari made payment on 1st April 2022 as

    below without any notice of how to appropriate them:

    (i) A cheque of ` 9,680

    (ii) A cheque of ` 15,000

    Advice under the provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.

5. What will be rights with the promisor in following cases? Explain with reasons:

    (a) Mr. X promised to bring back Mr. Y to life again.

    (b) A agreed to sell 50 kgs of apple to B. The loaded truck left for delivery on 15th
             March but due to riots in between reached A on 19th March.

    (c) An artist promised to paint on the fixed date for a fixed amount of
             remuneration but met with an accident and lost his both hands.

    (d) Abhishek entered into contract of import of toys from China. But due to
             disturbance in the relation of both the countries, the imports from China were
             banned.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                               2.119

ANSWER/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.  (a)  2.      (d)  3.                           (c)  4.  (d)  5.  (d)    6.  (c)

7.  (c)  8.      (b)  9.                           (c) 10. (b) 11. (a) 12. (b)

Answer to the Descriptive Question

1. Section 42 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 requires that when two or more persons
         have made a joint promise, then, unless a contrary intention appears from the
         contract, all such persons jointly must fulfill the promise. In the event of the death of
         any of them, his representative jointly with the survivors and in case of the death of
         all promisors, the representatives of all jointly must fulfill the promise.

         Section 43 allows the promisee to seek performance from any of the joint promisors.
         The liability of the joint promisors has thus been made not only joint but "joint and
         several". Section 43 provides that in the absence of express agreement to the
         contrary, the promisee may compel any one or more of the joint promisors to
         perform the whole of the promise.

         Section 43 deals with the contribution among joint promisors. The promisors, may
         compel every joint promisor to contribute equally to the performance of the promise
         (unless a contrary intention appears from the contract). If any one of the joint
         promisors makes default in such contribution the remaining joint promisors must
         bear the loss arising from such default in equal shares.

         As per the provisions of above sections,

         (i) Y can recover the contribution from X and Z because X, Y and Z are joint
                   promisors.

         (ii) Legal representative of X are liable to pay the contribution to Y. However, a
                   legal representative is liable only to the extent of property of the deceased
                   received by him.

         (iii) Y also can recover the contribution from Z's assets.

2. A contract which involves the use of personal skill or is founded on personal
         consideration comes to an end on the death of the promisor. As regards any other
         contract the legal representatives of the deceased promisor are bound to perform it
         unless a contrary intention appears from the contract (Section 37 of the Indian

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.120  BUSINESS LAWS

         Contract Act, 1872). But their liability under a contract is limited to the value of the
         property they inherit from the deceased.

         (i) In the instant case, since painting involves the use of personal skill and on
                   becoming Mr. C paralyzed, Mr. Rich cannot ask Mr. K to complete the artistic
                   work in lieu of his father Mr. C.

         (ii) According to section 65 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, when an agreement
                   is discovered to be void or when a contract becomes void, any person who
                   has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is bound to
                   restore it, or to make compensation for it to the person from whom he
                   received it.

         Hence, in the instant case, the agreement between Mr. Rich and Mr. C has become
         void because of paralysis to Mr. C. So, Mr. Rich can ask Mr. K for refund of money
         paid in advance to his father, Mr. C.

3. In terms of the provisions of Section 65 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, when an
         agreement is discovered to be void or when a contract becomes void, any person
         who has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is bound to
         restore it, or to make compensation for it to the person from whom he received it.

         Referring to the above provision, we can analyse the situation as under.

         The contract is not a void contract. Mr. SUCH is not responsible for Mr. JHUTH's
         negligence. Therefore, Mr. SUCH can rescind the contract and retain the security
         amount since the security is not a benefit received under the contract, it is a security
         that the purchaser would fulfil his contract and is ancillary to the contract for the sale
         of the Motor Car.

         Regarding the second situation given in the question, the agreement becomes void
         due to the destruction of the Motor car, which is the subject matter of the agreement
         here. Therefore, the security amount received by Mr. SUCH is required to be refunded
         back to Mr. JHUTH.

4. If the performance consists of payment of money and there are several debts to be
         paid, the payment shall be appropriated as per provisions of Sections 59, 60 and 61.
         The debtor has, at the time of payment, the right of appropriating the payment. In
         default of debtor, the creditor has option of election and in default of either the law
         will allow appropriation of debts in order of time.

         In the present case, Mr. Murari had made two payments by way of two cheques. One
         cheque was exactly the amount of the bill drawn. It would be understood even
         though not specifically appropriated by Mr. Murari that it will be against the bill of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872                      2.121

         exact amount. Hence cheque of `9,680 will be appropriated against the bill of
         ` 9,680 which was due in May 2019.

         Cheque of ` 15000 can be appropriated against any lawful debt which is due even
         though the same is time-barred.

         Hence, Mr. Girdhari can appropriate the same against the debt of `12,120 which was
         due in 2016 and balance against ` 5650 which was due in August 2018.

5. (a) The contract is void because of its initial impossibility of performance.

         (b) Time is essence of this contract. As by the time apples reached B they were
                   already rotten. The contract is discharged due to destruction of subject matter
                   of contract.

         (c) Such contract is of personal nature and hence cannot be performed due to
                   occurrence of an event resulting in impossibility of performance of contract.

         (d) Such contract is discharged without performance because of subsequent
                   illegality nature of the contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
