CHAPTER  3

THE SALE OF GOODS
ACT, 1930

 UNIT -1: FORMATION OF THE CONTRACT OF SALE

                                              LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to understand-
 Scope of the Act
 Definitions of certain terms.
 Meaning of contract of sale.
 Distinctions of sale from other similar contracts.
 Formalities of contract of sale.
 Subject matter of contract of sale.
 Ascertainment of price for the contract of sale.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              3.2               BUSINESS LAWS

UNIT OVERVIEW

                                                   Contract of Sale

  Agreement        Transfer of                               Goods                       Price          Essentials
Buyer Seller        Property                                                                             of valid
                                                                                                        contract
                                                   Existing          Future  Contingent      Money
              Immediate   Yet to be                Goods             Goods      Goods    consideration
               Transfer  transferred
                 (Sale)  (Agreement

                            to sell)

                                                   Specific Ascertained Unascertained

Sale of Goods before Sale of Goods Act, 1930

The Sale of Goods Act, 1930 deals with the laws relating to sale of goods in India. This Act is
mainly based on English Sale of Goods Act, 1893. Before the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, all the
provisions relating to sale of goods was covered under the Chapter VII of Indian Contract Act,
1872. A strong need was felt to have an independent Sale of Goods Act and consequently a
new act called the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 was passed. The Act came into force from 1st July
1930 and extends to whole of India.

    INTRODUCTION

Sale of goods is one of the specific forms of contracts recognized and regulated by law in
India. Sale is a typical bargain between the buyer and the seller. The Sale of Goods Act, 1930
allows the parties to modify the provisions of the law by express stipulations. However, in
some cases, this freedom is severely restricted.

Sale of Goods Act, 1930 is an Act to define and amend the law relating to the sale of goods.

    1.1 SCOPE OF THE ACT

The provisions of the Act are applicable to the contracts related to the sale of goods which
means movable properties. The Act is not applicable for the sale of immovable properties like
land, fields, shop or house etc. For immovable property, Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is
applicable. Sale of Goods Act, 1930 deals only with movable property.

The general provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 apply to a Contract of Sale of Goods
as far as they are not inconsistent with the express provisions of the Sale of Goods Act.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.3

The expressions used but not defined in the Sales of Goods Act, 1930 and defined in the Indian
Contract Act, 1872 have the meanings assigned to them in that Act.

The customs and usages will bind both the parties if these are reasonable and are known to
the parties at the time of entering the contract of sale.

    1.2 DEFINITIONS

The Sale of Goods Act, 1930 defines the terms which have been frequently used in the Act,
which are as follows ­

(A) Buyer and Seller: `Buyer' means a person who buys or agrees to buy goods [Section
         2(1)]. `Seller' means a person who sells or agrees to
         sell goods [Section 2(13)]. The two terms, `buyer' and
         `seller' are complementary and represent the two
         parties to a contract of sale of goods. Both the terms
         are, however, used in a sense wider than their common
         meaning. Not only the person who buys but also the
         one who agrees to buy is a buyer. Similarly, a `seller'
         means not only a person who sells but also a person
         who agrees to sell.

(B) Goods and other related terms:

         "Goods" means every kind of movable property other than actionable claims and
         money; and includes stock and shares, growing crops, grass, and things attached to or
         forming part of the land, which are agreed to be severed/ separated from the land
         before sale or under the contract of sale. [Section 2(7)]

         `Actionable claims' are claims, which can be enforced only by an action or suit, e.g.,
         debt. A debt is not a movable property or goods. Even the Fixed Deposit Receipts (FDR)
         are considered as goods under Section 176 of the Indian Contract Act read with Section
         2(7) of the Sales of Goods Act.

         "Goods" include both tangible goods and intangible goods like goodwill, copyrights,
         patents, trademarks etc. Stock and shares, gas, steam, water, electricity and decree of
         the court are also considered to be goods.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       3.4          BUSINESS LAWS

Goods  Means every                                 Other  Actionable       Also
       kind of                                     than   claims         includes Stock & Shares
       movable
       property                                           Money in                      Growing crops
                                                          circulation
                                                                                        Grass, and

                                                                                        Things
                                                                                        attached to or
                                                                                        forming part of
                                                                                        land which
                                                                                        agreed to be
                                                                                        severed

Classification of Goods

                                                          Goods

                         Existing                         Future         Contingent
                         Goods                            Goods             Goods

Specific            Ascertained                           Unascertained

(i) EXISTING GOODS are such goods which are in existence at the time of the
         contract of sale, i.e., those owned or possessed or acquired by the seller at the
         time of contract of sale (Section 6).

         The existing goods may be of following kinds:

         (a) Specific goods mean goods identified and agreed upon at the time
                   a contract of sale is made [Section 2(14)].

                   Example 1: Any specified and finally decided goods like a Samsung
                   Galaxy S7 Edge, Whirlpool washing machine of 7 kg etc.

                   Example 2: `A' had five cars of different models. He agreed to sell his
                   `Santro' car to `B' and `B' agreed to purchase the same `Santro' car. In
                   this case, the sale is for specific goods as the car has been identified
                   and agreed at the time of the contract of sale.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.5

         (b) Ascertained Goods are those goods which are identified in
                   accordance with the agreement after the contract of sale is made. This
                   term is not defined in the Act but has been judicially interpreted. In
                   actual practice, the term `ascertained goods' is used in the same sense
                   as `specific goods.' When out of a lot or out of large quantity of
                   unascertained goods, the number or quantity contracted for is
                   identified, such identified goods are called ascertained goods.

                   Example 3: A wholesaler of cotton has 100 bales in his godown. He
                   agrees to sell 50 bales and these bales were selected and set aside. On
                   selection, the goods become ascertained. In this case, the contract is
                   for the sale of ascertained goods, as the cotton bales to be sold are
                   identified and agreed after the formation of the contract. It may be
                   noted that before the ascertainment of the goods, the contract was for
                   the sale of unascertained goods.

         (c) Unascertained goods are the goods which are not specifically
                   identified or ascertained at the time of making of the contract. They
                   are indicated or defined only by description or sample.

                   Example 4: If A agrees to sell to B one packet of salt out of the lot of
                   one hundred packets lying in his shop, it is a sale of unascertained
                   goods because it is not known which packet is to be delivered. As soon
                   as a particular packet is separated from the lot, it becomes ascertained
                   or specific goods.

                   Example 5: X has ten horses. He promises to sell one of them but does
                   not specify which horse he will sell. It is a contract of sale of
                   unascertained goods.

(ii) FUTURE GOODS means goods to be manufactured or produced or acquired
         by the seller after making the contract of sale [Section 2(6)].

         A contract for the sale of future goods is always an agreement to sell. It is never
         actual sale because a person cannot transfer what is not in existence.

         Example 6: 1,000 quintals of potatoes to be grown on A's field is an example
         of agreement to sell.

         Example 7: P agrees to sell to Q all the milk that his cow may yield during the
         coming year. This is a contract for the sale of future goods.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.6              BUSINESS LAWS

Example 8: T agrees to sell to S all the oranges which will be produced in his
garden this year. It is contract of sale of future goods, amounting to `an
agreement to sell.'

(iii) CONTINGENT GOODS: The acquisition of goods which depends upon an uncertain
         contingency (uncertain event) are called `contingent goods' [Section 6(2)].

Contingent goods also operate as `an agreement to sell' and not a `sale' so far
as the question of passing of property to the buyer is concerned. In other words,
like the future goods, in the case of contingent goods also, the property does
not pass to the buyer at the time of making the contract.

Example 9: A agrees to sell to B a Picasso painting provided he is able to
purchase it from its present owner. This is a contract for the sale of contingent
goods.

Example 10: P contracts to sell 50 pieces of particular article provided the ship
which is bringing them reaches the port safely. This is an agreement for the sale
of contingent goods.

(C) Delivery - its forms and derivatives: Delivery means voluntary transfer of possession
         from one person to another [Section 2(2)]. As a general rule, delivery of goods may be
         made by doing anything, which has the effect of putting the goods in the possession
         of the buyer, or any person authorized to hold them on his behalf.

Forms of delivery: Following are the kinds of delivery for transfer of possession:

                                                   Delivery of Goods

Voluntary transfer of possession by one person to another

Actual delivery                                    Constructive delivery  Symbolic delivery

(i) Actual delivery: When the goods are physically delivered to the buyer. Actual
         delivery takes place when the seller transfers the physical possession of the
         goods to the buyer or to a third person authorised to hold goods on behalf of
         the buyer. This is the most common method of delivery.

(ii) Constructive delivery: When transfer of goods is effected without any change
         in the custody or actual possession of the thing as in the case of delivery by
         attornment (acknowledgement)

         Example 11: Where a warehouseman holding the goods of A agrees to hold
         them on behalf of B, at A's request.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.7

                   Constructive delivery takes place when a person in possession of the goods
                   belonging to the seller acknowledges to the buyer that he holds the goods on
                   buyer's behalf.

         (iii) Symbolic delivery: When there is a delivery of a thing in token of a transfer of
                   something else, i.e., delivery of goods in the course of transit may be made by
                   handing over documents of title to goods, like bill of lading or railway receipt
                   or delivery orders or the key of a warehouse containing the goods is handed
                   over to buyer. Where actual delivery is not possible, there may be delivery of
                   the means of getting possession of the goods.

         Goods are said to be in a deliverable state when they are in such a condition that
         the buyer would, under the contract, be bound to take delivery of them [Section
         2(3)].

         Example 12: When A contracts to sell timber and make bundles thereof, the goods
         will be in a deliverable state after A has put the goods in such a condition.

(D) "Document of title to goods" includes bill of lading, dock-warrant, warehouse
         keeper's certificate, wharfingers' certificate, railway receipt, multimodal transport
         document, warrant or order for the delivery of goods and any other document used in
         the ordinary course of business as proof of the possession or control of goods or is for
         authorizing or purporting to authorize, either by endorsement or by delivery, the
         possessor of the document to transfer or receive goods thereby represented. [Section
         2(4)]

         Example 13: Bill of lading, dock warrant, warehouse keeper's certificate, wharfinger's
         certificate, railway receipt, warrant, an order of delivery of goods.

         The list is only illustrative and not exhaustive. Any other document which has the above
         characteristics also will fall under the same category. Though a bill of lading is a
         document of title, a mate's receipt is not; it is regarded at law as merely an
         acknowledgement for the receipt of goods. A document amounts to a document of
         title only where it shows an unconditional undertaking to deliver the goods to the
         holder of the document.

         However, there is a difference between a `document showing title' and `document
         of title'. A share certificate is a `document' showing title but not a document of title.
         It merely shows that the person named in the share certificate is entitled to the share
         represented by it, but it does not allow that person to transfer the share mentioned
         therein by mere endorsement on the back of the certificate and the delivery of the
         certificate.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.8  BUSINESS LAWS

(E) Mercantile Agent [Section 2(9)]: It means an agent who in the customary course of
         business has, as such agent, authority either to sell goods or to consign goods for the
         purpose of sale or to buy goods or to raise money on the security of the goods.
         Mercantile agent can borrow money by pledging the goods.

         Example 14: Such kind of agents are auctioneers or brokers, etc.

(F) Property [Section 2(11)]: `Property' here means `ownership' or general property. In
         every contract of sale, the ownership of goods must be transferred by the seller to the
         buyer, or there should be an agreement by the seller to transfer the ownership to the
         buyer. It means the general property (right of ownership-in-goods) and not merely a
         special property.

         The property in the goods means the general property i.e., all ownership right of the
         goods. Note that the `general property' in goods is to be distinguished from a `special
         property'. It is quite possible that the general property in a thing may be in one person
         and a special property in the same thing may be in another e.g., when an article is
         pledged, the special property gets transferred and not the general property. The
         general property in a thing may be transferred, subject to the special property
         continuing to remain with another person i.e., the pledgee who has a right to retain
         the goods pledged till payment of the stipulated dues.

         Example 15: If A who owns certain goods pledges them to B, A has general property
         in the goods, whereas B has special property or interest in the goods to the extent of
         the amount of advance he has made. In case A fails to repay the amount borrowed on
         pledging the goods, then B may sell his goods but not otherwise.

(G) Insolvent [Section 2(8)]: A person is said to be insolvent when he ceases to pay his
         debts in the ordinary course of business, or cannot pay his debts as they become due,
         whether he has committed an act of insolvency or not.

(H) Price [Section 2(10)]: Price means the money consideration for a sale of goods. It is
         the value of goods expressed in monetary terms. It is the essential requirement to
         make a contract of sale of goods.

(I) Quality of goods includes their state or condition. [Section 2(12)]

    1.3 SALE AND AGREEMENT TO SELL (SECTION 4)

According to section 4(1), "A contract of sale of goods is a contract whereby the seller
transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a price". There may be a
contract of sale between one part-owner and another.

A contract of sale may be absolute or conditional. [Section 4(2)]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.9

Where under a contract of sale, the property in the goods is transferred from the seller to the
buyer, the contract is called a sale, but where the transfer of the property in the goods is to
take place at a future time or subject to some condition thereafter to be fulfilled, it is called
an agreement to sell. [Section 4(3)]
An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses or the conditions are fulfilled
subject to which the property in the goods is to be transferred. [Section 4(4)]

                                Contract
                                 of sale

                                                 Sale

                                           Agreement to
                                                  sell

Sale: In Sale, the property in goods is transferred from seller to the buyer immediately. The
term sale is defined in the Section 4(3) of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 as ­ "where under a
contract of sale the property in the goods is transferred from the seller to the buyer, the
contract is called a sale."

Agreement to Sell: In an agreement to sell, the ownership of the goods is not transferred
immediately. It is intending to transfer at a future date upon the completion of certain
conditions thereon. The term is defined in Section 4(3) of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, as ­
"where the transfer of the property in the goods is to take place at a future time or subject to
some condition thereafter to be fulfilled, it is called an agreement to sell."

Thus, whether a contract of sale of goods is an absolute sale or an agreement to sell, depends
on the fact whether it contemplates immediate transfer from the seller to the buyer or the
transfer is to take place at a future date.

Example 16: X agrees with Y on 10th October, 2022 that he will sell his car to Y on 10th
November, 2022 for a sum of ` 7 lakhs. It is an agreement to sell.

When agreement to sell becomes sale: An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time
elapses or the conditions are fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods is to be
transferred.

The following elements must co-exist so as to constitute a contract of sale of goods under
the Sale of Goods Act, 1930:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.10                      BUSINESS LAWS

(i) There must be at least two parties, the seller and the buyer and the two must be
         different persons. A person cannot be both the seller and the buyer and sell his goods
         to himself.

(ii) The subject matter of the contract must necessarily be goods covering only movable
         property. It may be either existing goods, owned or possessed by the seller or future
         goods.

(iii) A price in money (not in kind) should be paid or promised. But there is nothing to
         prevent the consideration from being partly in money and partly in kind.

(iv) A transfer of property in goods from seller to the buyer must take place. The contract
         of sale is made by an offer to buy or sell goods for a price by one party and the
         acceptance of such offer by other.

(v) A contract of sale may be absolute or conditional.

(vi) All other essential elements of a valid contract must be present in the contract of sale,
         e.g. free consent of parties, competency of parties, legality of object and consideration
         etc.

1.4 DISTINCTION BETWEEN SALE AND AN
         AGREEMENT TO SELL

The differences between the two are as follows:

     Basis of difference                           Sale         Agreement to sell
Transfer of property
                          The property in the goods             Property in the goods
Nature of contract        passes to the buyer                   passes to the buyer on
                          immediately.                          future date or on fulfilment
Remedies for breach                                             of some condition.

                          It is an executed contract i.e.       It is an executory contract
                                                                i.e. contract for which
                          contract                 for   which  consideration is to be paid
                                                                at a future date.
                          consideration has been paid.

                          The seller can sue the buyer          The aggrieved party can sue
                          for the price of the goods            for damages only and not
                          because of the passing of             for the price, unless the price
                          the property therein to the           was payable at a stated date.
                          buyer.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                      THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                  3.11

Liability of parties      A subsequent loss or Such loss or destruction is
                          destruction of the goods is the liability of the seller.
                          the liability of the buyer.

Burden of risk            Risk of loss is that of buyer Risk of loss is that of seller.
                          since risk follows ownership.

Nature of rights          Creates Jus in rem means        Creates Jus in personam
                          right against the whole         means rights against a
                          world.                          particular party to the
                                                          contract

Right of resale           The seller cannot resell the The seller may sell the goods

                          goods.                          since ownership is with the

                                                          seller.

In case of insolvency of  The official assignee will not  The official assignee will
seller                    be able to take over the        acquire control over the
                          goods but will recover the      goods but the price will not
                          price from the buyer.           be recoverable.

In case of insolvency of The official assignee will The official assignee will not

buyer                     have control over the goods. have any control over the

                                                          goods.

    1.5 SALE DISTINGUISHED FROM OTHER SIMILAR
             CONTRACTS

(i) Sale and Hire Purchase: Contract of sale resembles with contracts of hire purchase
         very closely, and indeed the real object of a contract of hire purchase is the sale of the
         goods ultimately.

         Hire purchase agreements are governed by the Hire-purchase Act, 1972. Term "hire-
         purchase agreement" means an agreement under which goods are let on hire and
         under which the hirer has an option to purchase them in accordance with the terms of
         the agreement and includes an agreement under which--

         (a) Possession of goods is delivered by the owner thereof to a person on condition
                   that such person pays the agreed amount in periodical instalments, and

         (b) The property in the goods is to pass to such person on the payment of the last
                   of such instalments, and

         (c) Such person has a right to terminate the agreement at any time before the
                   property so passes;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
        3.12           BUSINESS LAWS

Nonetheless, a sale has to be distinguished from a hire purchase as their legal incidents
are quite different.

The main points of distinction between the `sale' and `hire-purchase' are as follows:

Basis of difference                                Sale       Hire- Purchase

Time of       passing  Property in the goods is          The property in goods passes
property               transferred to the buyer          to the hirer upon payment of
                       immediately at the time of        the last instalment.
                       contract.

Position of the The position of the buyer is The position of the hirer is

party                  that of the owner of the that of a bailee till he pays the

                       goods.                            last instalment.

Termination        of The buyer cannot terminate The hirer may, if he so likes,
contract
                       the contract and is bound to terminate the contract by

                       pay the price of the goods. returning the goods to its

                                                         owner without any liability to

                                                         pay  the          remaining

                                                         instalments.

Burden of Risk of      The seller takes the risk of      The owner takes no such risk,
insolvency of the      any loss resulting from the       for if the hirer fails to pay an
buyer                  insolvency of the buyer.          instalment, the owner has
                                                         right to take back the goods.

Transfer of title      The buyer can pass a good         The hirer cannot pass any title
                       title to a bona fide              even to a bona fide purchaser
                       purchaser from him.               untill he pays the last
                                                         instalment.

Resale                 The buyer in sale can resell      The hire purchaser cannot
                       the goods.                        resell unless he has paid all
                                                         the instalments.

(ii) Sale and Bailment: A `bailment' is the delivery of goods for some specific purpose
         under a contract on the condition that the same goods are to be returned when the
         purpose is accomplished to the bailor or are to be disposed of according to the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930               3.13

directions of the bailor. Provisions related to bailment are regulated by the Indian
Contract Act, 1872.

The difference between bailment and sale may be clearly understood by studying
the following:

Basis of                                           Sale  Bailment

difference

Transfer       of The property in goods is There is only transfer of
property
                 transferred from the seller to possession of goods from the

                 the buyer. So, it is transfer of bailor to the bailee for any of

                 general property.                       the reasons like safe custody,

                                                         carriage etc. So, it is transfer

                                                         of special property.

Return of goods  The return of goods in                  The bailee must return the
                 contract of sale is not                 goods to the bailor on the
                 possible.                               accomplishment of the
                                                         purpose for which the
                                                         bailment was made.

Consideration    The consideration is the price The consideration may be

                 in terms of money.                      gratuitous or non-gratuitous.

(iii) Sale and contract for work and labour: A contract of sale of goods is one in which
         some goods are sold or are to be sold for a price. But where no goods are sold, and
         there is only the doing or rendering of some work of labour, then the contract is only
         of work and labour and not of sale of goods.

         Example 17: Where gold is supplied to a goldsmith for preparing an ornament or
         when an artist is asked to paint a picture. Here, the basic substance of the contract is
         the exercise of skill and labour, therefore it is contract for work and labour.

    1.6 CONTRACT OF SALE HOW MADE (SECTION 5)

According to Section 5(1), A contract of sale may be made in any of the following modes:
(i) Contract of sale is made by an offer to buy or sell goods for a price and acceptance of

         such offer.
(ii) There may be immediate delivery of the goods; or
(iii) There may be immediate payment of price, but it may be agreed that the delivery is to

         be made at some future date; or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.14  BUSINESS LAWS

(iv) There may be immediate delivery of the goods and an immediate payment of price; or

(v) It may be agreed that the delivery or payment or both are to be made in instalments;
         or

(vi) It may be agreed that the delivery or payment or both are to be made at some future
         date.

Example 18: R agrees to deliver his old motorcycle valued at ` 55,000 to S in exchange for
a new motorcycle and agrees to pay the difference in cash, it is a Contract of Sale.

    1.7 SUBJECT MATTER OF CONTRACT OF SALE

Existing or future goods (section 6):

(1) The goods which form the subject matter of a contract of sale may be either existing
         goods that are acquired, owned or possessed by the seller, or future goods.

(2) There may be a contract for the sale of goods, the acquisition of which by the seller
         depends upon a contingency which may or may not happen.

         Example 19: A contract for sale of certain cloth to be manufactured by a certain mill
         is a valid contract. Such contacts are called contingent contracts.

(3) There may be a contract of sale, where the seller purports to effect a present sale of
         future goods, such contract operates as an agreement to sell the goods.

Goods perishing before making of contract (Section 7): Where there is a contract for the
sale of specific goods, the contract is void if the goods without the knowledge of the seller
have, at the time when the contract was made, perished or become so damaged that they no
longer answer to their description given in the contract.

Example 20: A agrees to sell B 50 bags of wheat stored in the A's godown. Due to water
logging, all the goods stored in the godown were destroyed. At the time of agreement, neither
parties were aware of the fact. The agreement is void.

Goods perishing before sale but after agreement to sell (Section 8): Where there is an
agreement to sell specific goods, and subsequently the goods without any fault on the part
of the seller or buyer perish or become so damaged that they no longer answer to their
description in the agreement before the risk passes to the buyer, the agreement is thereby
avoided or becomes void.

Perishing of future goods: If the future goods are specific, the destruction of such goods
will amount to supervening impossibility and the contract shall become void.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                   THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.15

Example 21: A agrees to sell B 100 tons of tomatoes grown on his land next year. But the
crop failed due to some disease in plants and A could only deliver 80 tons of tomatoes to B.
It was held A was not liable as the performance of contract became impossible due to
supervening impossibility.

    1.8 ASCERTAINMENT OF PRICE (SECTION 9 & 10)

Ascertainment of price (Section 9):

`Price' means the monetary consideration for sale of goods [Section 2 (10)]. By virtue of
Section 9, the price in the contract of sale may be-

(1) fixed by the contract, or

(2) agreed to be fixed in a manner provided by the contract, e.g., by a valuer, or

(3) determined by the course of dealings between the parties.

Agreement to sell at valuation (Section 10):

Section 10 provides for the determination of price by a third party.

1.  Where there is an agreement to sell goods on the terms that price has to be fixed by

    the third party and he either does not or cannot make such valuation, the agreement

    will be void.

2.  In case the third party is prevented by the default of either party from fixing the price,

    the party at fault will be liable to the damages to the other party who is not at fault.

3.  However, a buyer who has received and appropriated the goods must pay a reasonable

    price for them in any eventuality.

Example 22: P is having two bikes. He agrees to sell both of the bikes to S at a price to be
fixed by the Q. He gives delivery of one bike immediately. Q refuses to fix the price. As such
P ask S to return the bike already delivered while S claims for the delivery of the second bike
too. In the given instance, buyer S shall pay reasonable price to P for the bike already taken.
As regards the Second bike, the contract can be avoided as the third party Q refuses to fix the
price

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               3.16            BUSINESS LAWS

SUMMARY

In nutshell, contract of sale of goods is a contract where the seller transfers or agrees to
transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a price. Where, however, the transfer of
property in goods is to take place at a future date or subject to some conditions to be fulfilled,
the contract is called `agreement to sell'. The subject matter of such contract must always be
goods. Price for goods may be fixed by the contract or may be agreed to be fixed later on in
a specific manner.

                          FORMATION OF THE CONTRACT OF SALE

 Contract      Agreement to sell      Essentials of Sale                Documents of          Ascertainment of Price
  of Sale                                                                     title
                    (Sec.4 (3))       · Two Parties                                           · fixed by contract, or
(Sec.4 (1))                                                             Bill of lading,       · agreed to be fixed in a
               Transfer of property   · Price                           Dock warrant,
Transfer of    in the goods is to                                       Warehouse-             manner provided by the
property in    take place at a        · Transfer                    of  keeper's               contract, e.g., by a
the goods      future time or                                           certificate,           valuer, or
from the       subject to some                     general property     Railway receipt,      · determined by the
seller to the  conditions thereafter                                                           course of dealings
buyer.         to be fulfilled.       · Essential                       Delivery order.        between the parties

                                                   elements of a

                                                   valid contract.

                                                   Goods

             Meaning                                                        Types
Every kind of movable
property.                             Existing                              Future               Contingent

              Excludes                Owned or                          To                be  Acquisition of
Actionable Claims & Money.            possessed by                                            which by the
                                      seller at the                     manufactured          seller depends
              Includes                time of sale.                                           upon a
Stock & Shares, Growing                                                 or produced or        contingency.
Crops, Grass & things
Attached to & forming part of                                           acquired after
land.
                                                                        making            of

                                                                        contract of sale.

           Specific                      Ascertained                                  Unascertained

Identified and agreed          Good become ascertained                          Defined only by description
upon at the time a             subsequent to the formation                      and may form part of a lot.
contract of sale.              of a contract of sale.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                                      3.17

              Delivery

Meaning                                            Types

Actual                                             Constructive     Symbolic

 Goods are    When a person in                                    Delivery of a
 physically   possession of the                                  thing in token
delivered to  goods belonging                                    of a transfer of
                                                                 something else
    buyer        to the seller
              acknowledges to
              the buyer that he
              holds the goods
              on buyer's behalf

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. A contract for the sale of goods where property would pass to the buyer on payment of
         total price would be;
         (a) sale
         (b) agreement to sell
         (c) hire-purchase contract.
         (d) sale on approval.

2. The term "goods" under Sale of Goods Act, 1930 does not include
         (a) goodwill.
         (b) actionable claims.
         (c) stocks and shares.
         (d) harvested crops.

3. A contract for the sale of "future goods" is
         (a) sale
         (b) agreement to sell.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.18  BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) void.
         (d) hire-purchase contract.
4. The sale of Goods Act, 1930 deals with the
         (a) movable goods only.
         (b) immovable goods only.
         (c) both movable and immovable goods.
         (d) all goods except ornaments.
5. Under Sale of Goods Act, 1930 the terms "Goods" means every kind of movable property
         and it includes
         (a) stock and share.
         (b) growing crops, grass
         (c) both (a) and (b).
         (d) none of the above
6. The Sale of Goods Act, 1930 deals with
         (a) sale
         (b) mortgage.
         (c) pledge.
         (d) all of the above.
7. Which one of the following is true?
         (a) the provisions of Sale of Goods were originally with the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
         (b) the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 deals with mortgage.
         (c) the Sale of Goods Act restricts the parties to modify the provisions of law.
         (d) none of the above.
8. Goods which are in existence at the time of the Contract of Sale is known as
         (a) present Goods.
         (b) existing Goods.
         (c) specific Goods.
         (d) none of the above.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.19

9. Which of the following is not a form of delivery?
         (a) constructive delivery.
         (b) structured delivery.
         (c) actual delivery.
         (d) symbolic delivery.

10. Which one of the following is/are document of title to goods?
         (a) railway receipt.
         (b) wharfinger's certificate.
         (c) warehouse keeper's certificate.
         (d) all of the above

11. Which one of the following is not true?
         (a) document showing title is different from document of title.
         (b) bill of lading is a document of title to goods.
         (c) specific goods can be identified and agreed upon at the time of the Contract of
                   Sale.
         d) none of the above.

12. Mercantile Agent is having an authority to
         (a) sell or consign goods.
         (b) raise money on the security of goods.
         c) sell or buy goods.
         (d) any of the above.

13. Contract of Sale is
         (a) executory Contract.
         (b) executed Contract.
         (c) both of the above.
         (d) none of the above.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.20  BUSINESS LAWS

14. In which form of the contract, the property in the goods passes to the buyer immediately:
         (a) agreement to sell.
         (b) hire purchase.
         (c) sale
         (d) instalment to sell.

15. In case of hire purchase the hirer can pass title to a bona fide purchaser.
         (a) true.
         (b) false.

16. In a contract of sale, the agreement may be expressed or implied from the conduct of the
         parties.
         (a) true.
         (b) false.

17. In a contract of sale, subject matter of contract must always be money.
         (a) true.
         (b) false.

18. If a seller handed over the keys of a warehouse containing the goods to the buyer results
         in
         (a) constructive delivery
         (b) actual delivery
         (c) symbolic delivery
         (d) none of the above

19. If A agrees to deliver 100 kg of sugar to B in exchange of 15 mts of cloth, then it is
         (a) Contract of sale.
         (b) Agreement to sell.
         (c) Sale on Approval.
         (d) Barter.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.21

20. In a hire-purchase agreement, the hirer
         (a) has an option to buy the goods.
         (b) must buy the goods.
         (c) must return the goods.
         (d) is not given the possession of goods.

21. A agrees to deliver his old car valued at `1, 80,000 to B, a car dealer, in exchange for a
         new car, and agrees to pay the difference in cash it is
         (a) Contract of sale.
         (b) Agreement to sell.
         (c) Exchange.
         (d) Barter.

22. Legally, a contract of sale includes
         (a) sale.
         (b) agreement to Sell.
         (c) barter.
         (d) both (a) and (b)

23. The Sale of Goods Act, 1930 came into force on
         (a) 15th March, 1930.
         (b) 1st July, 1930.
         (c) 30th July, 1930.
         (d) 30th June, 1930.

24. The person who buys or agrees to buy goods is known as
         (a) consumer.
         (b) buyer.
         (c) both (a) and (b)
         (d) none of the above.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.22  BUSINESS LAWS

25. Voluntary transfer of possession by one person to another is popularly known as
         (a) transfer.
         (b) possession.
         (c) delivery.
         (d) none of the above.

26. If X commissioned Y, an artist, to paint a portrait of A for 200 dollars & Y uses his own
         canvas & paint then it is
         (a) Contract of sale.
         (b) Contract of work & materials.
         (c) Sale on approval.
         (d) Hire-Purchase agreement.

27. The property in the goods means the
         (a) possession of goods.
         (b) custody of goods.
         (c) ownership of goods.
         (d) both (a) and (b)

28. The goods are at the risk of a party who has the
         (a) Ownership of goods.
         (b) Possession of goods.
         (c) Custody of goods.
         (d) both (b) and (c)

29. In case of sale of standing trees, the property passes to the buyer when trees are
         (a) felled and ascertained.
         (b) not felled but earmarked.
         (c) counted and ascertained.
         (d) both (b) and (c)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.23

30. In case the delivery of goods is delayed due to the fault of party, the goods shall be at
         the risk of defaulting party even though the ownership is with the other party.

         (a) True, if there is a provision to this effect.
         (b) False, as it is against the general rule.
31. Which of the following modes of delivery of goods is considered effective for a valid
         contract of sale?
         (a) Actual delivery.
         (b) symbolic delivery.

         (c) Constructive delivery.
         (d) all of these.

Descriptive questions

1. A agrees to buy a new TV from a shop keeper for ` 30,000 payable partly in cash of
         ` 20,000 and partly in exchange of old TV set. Is it a valid Contract of Sale of Goods?
         Give reasons for your answer.

2. A agrees to sell to B 100 bags of sugar arriving on a ship from Australia to India within
         next two months. Unknown to the parties, the ship has already sunk. Does B have any
         right against A under the Sale of Goods Act, 1930?

3. X contracted to sell his car to Y. They did not discuss the price of the car at all. X later
         refused to sell his car to Y on the ground that the agreement was void being uncertain
         about price. Can Y demand the car under the Sale of Goods Act, 1930?

4. Classify the following transactions according to the types of goods they are:
         (i) A wholesaler of cotton has 100 bales in his godown. He agrees to sell 50 bales
                   and these bales were selected and set aside.
         (ii) A agrees to sell to B one packet of sugar out of the lot of one hundred packets
                   lying in his shop.

         (iii) T agrees to sell to S all the apples which will be produced in his garden this year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         3.24         BUSINESS LAWS

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.  (b)  2.      (b)  3.                           (b)  4.  (a)  5.  (c)  6.  (a)

7.  (a)  8.      (b)  9.                           (b) 10. (d) 11. (d) 12. (d)

13. (b) 14. (c) 15. (b) 16. (a) 17. (b) 18. (c)

19. (d) 20. (a) 21. (a) 22. (d) 23. (b) 24. (b)

25. (c) 26. (b) 27. (c) 28. (a) 29. (a) 30. (a)

31. (d)

Answers to Descriptive Questions

1. It is necessary under the Sales of Goods Act, 1930 that the goods should be exchanged
         for money. If the goods are exchanged for goods, it will not be called a sale. It will be
         considered as barter. However, a contract for transfer of movable property for a
         definite price payable partly in goods and partly in cash is held to be a contract of Sale
         of Goods.

         In the given case, the new TV set is agreed to be sold for ` 30,000 and the price is
         payable partly in exchange of old TV set and partly in cash of ` 20,000. So, in this case,
         it is a valid contract of sale under the Sales of Goods Act, 1930.

2. In this case, B, the buyer has no right against A the seller. Section 8 of the Sales of
         Goods Act, 1930 provides that where there is an agreement to sell specific goods and
         the goods without any fault of either party perish, damaged or lost, the agreement is
         thereby avoided. This provision is based on the ground of supervening impossibility of
         performance which makes a contract void.

         So, all the following conditions required to treat it as a void contract are fulfilled in the
         above case:

         (i) There is an agreement to sell between A and B

         (ii) It is related to specific goods

         (iii) The goods are lost because of the sinking of ship before the property or risk
                   passes to the buyer.

         (iv) The loss of goods is not due to the fault of either party.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.25

3. Payment of the price by the buyer is an important ingredient of a contract of sale. If
         the parties totally ignore the question of price while making the contract, it would not
         become an uncertain and invalid agreement. It will rather be a valid contract and the
         buyer shall pay a reasonable price.

         In the give case, X and Y have entered into a contract for sale of car but they did not
         fix the price of the car. X refused to sell the car to Y on this ground. Y can legally
         demand the car from X and X can recover a reasonable price of the car from Y.

4. (i) A wholesaler of cotton has 100 bales in his godown. So, the goods are existing
                   goods. He agrees to sell 50 bales and these bales were selected and set aside.
                   On selection, the goods becomes ascertained. In this case, the contract is for
                   the sale of ascertained goods, as the cotton bales to be sold are identified and
                   agreed after the formation of the contract.

         (ii) If A agrees to sell to B one packet of sugar out of the lot of one hundred packets
                   lying in his shop, it is a sale of existing but unascertained goods because it is
                   not known which packet is to be delivered.

         (iii) T agrees to sell to S all the apples which will be produced in his garden this
                   year. It is contract of sale of future goods, amounting to 'an agreement to sell.'

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
