3.26           BUSINESS LAWS

UNIT ­ 2: CONDITIONS & WARRANTIES

                                             LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to understand:
 About Stipulation as to time
 Conditions and warranties in a contract of Sale
 About the implied conditions and warranties.
 The doctrine of `caveat emptor'.

UNIT OVERVIEW

      Stipulation with Reference to Goods

           Condition                                           Warranty

Essential to main purpose of                       Collateral to main purpose of
          the contract                                        the contract

      Breach-repudiation                             Breach-claim for damages

    2.1 STIPULATION AS TO TIME (SECTION 11)

As regard to time for the payment of price, unless a different intention appears from the terms
of contract, stipulation as regard this, is not deemed to be of the essence of a contract of sale.
But delivery of goods must be made without delay. Whether or not such a stipulation is of the
essence of a contract depends on the terms agreed upon.

Price for goods may be fixed by the contract or may be agreed to be fixed later on in a specific
manner. Stipulation as to time of delivery are usually the essence of the contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.27

    2.2 INTRODUCTION - CONDITIONS AND WARRANTIES

At the time of selling the goods, a seller usually makes certain statements or representations
with a view to induce the intending buyer to purchase the goods. Such representations are
generally about the nature and quality of goods, and about their fitness for buyer's purpose.

When these statements or representations do not form a part of the contract of sale, they are
not relevant and have no legal effects on the contract. But when these form part of the
contract of sale and the buyer relies upon them, they are relevant and have legal effects on
the contract of sale.

A representation which forms a part of the contract of sale and affects the contract, is called
a stipulation. However, every stipulation is not of equal importance. Some of these may be
very vital while others may be of somewhat lesser significance. The more significant
stipulations contained in a contract of sale of goods have been called as "Conditions", while
the less significant stipulation have been given the name "Warranties".

Condition and warranty (Section 12): A stipulation in a contract of sale with reference to
goods which are the subject thereof may be a condition or a warranty. [Sub-section (1)]

"A condition is a stipulation essential to the main purpose of the contract, the breach of which
gives rise to a right to treat the contract as repudiated". [Sub-section (2)]

Example 1: P wants to purchase a car from Q, which can have a mileage of 20 km/litre. Q pointing
at a particular vehicle says "This car will suit you." Later P buys the car but finds out later on that this
car only has a top mileage of 15 km/ litre. This amounts to a breach of condition because the seller
made the stipulation which forms the essence of the contract. In this case, the mileage was a
stipulation that was essential to the main purpose of the contract and hence its breach is a breach
of condition.

"A warranty is a stipulation collateral to the main purpose of the contract, the breach of which gives
rise to a claim for damages but not to a right to reject the goods and treat the contract as
repudiated". [Sub-section (3)].

Whether a stipulation in a contract of sale is a condition or a warranty depends in each case
on the construction of the contract. A stipulation may be a condition, though called a warranty
in the contract. [Sub-section (4)]

Example 2: Ram consults Shyam, a motor-car dealer for a car suitable for touring purposes
to promote the sale of his product. Shyam suggests `Maruti' and Ram accordingly buys it from
Shyam. The car turns out to be unfit for touring purposes. Here, the term that the `car should
be suitable for touring purposes' is a condition of the contract. It is so vital that its non-
fulfilment defeats the very purpose for which Ram purchases the car. Ram is therefore entitled
to reject the car and have refund of the price.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              3.28       BUSINESS LAWS

Let us assume, Ram buys a new Maruti car from the show room and the car is guaranteed
against any manufacturing defect under normal usage for a period of one year from the date
of original purchase and in the event of any manufacturing defect there is a warranty for
replacement of defective part if it cannot be properly repaired. After six months, Ram finds
that the horn of the car is not working, here in this case he cannot terminate the contract. The
manufacturer can either get it repaired or replaced it with a new horn. Ram gets a right to
claim for damages, if any, suffered by him but not the right of repudiation.

Difference between conditions and warranties:

The following are important differences between conditions and warranties.

Point of differences     Condition                        Warranty

Meaning                  A condition is a stipulation A warranty is a stipulation

                         essential to the main purpose of collateral to the main purpose

                         the contract.                    of the contract.

Right in case of breach  The aggrieved party can          The aggrieved party can claim
                         repudiate the contract or claim  only damages in case of breach
                         damages or both in the case of   of warranty.
                         breach of condition.

Conversion            of A breach of condition may be A breach of warranty cannot be
stipulations               treated as a breach of warranty. treated as a breach of condition.

    2.3 WHEN CONDITION IS TO BE TREATED AS
             WARRANTY (SECTION 13)

Section 13 specifies cases where a breach of condition be treated as a breach of warranty. As
a result of which the buyer loses his right to rescind the contract and can claim damages only.

In the following cases, a contract is not avoided even on account of a breach of a condition:

(i) Where the buyer altogether waives the performance of the condition. A party may for
         his own benefit, waive a stipulation. It should be a voluntary waiver by buyer.

(ii) Where the buyer elects to treat the breach of the conditions, as one of a warranty. That
         is to say, he may claim only damages instead of repudiating the contract. Here, the
         buyer has not waived the condition but decided to treat it as a warranty.

         Example 3: A agrees to supply B 10 bags of first quality sugar @ ` 625 per bag but
         supplies only second quality sugar, the price of which is ` 600 per bag. There is a
         breach of condition and the buyer can reject the goods. But if the buyer so elects, he

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                                 3.29

         may treat it as a breach of warranty, hence he may accept the second quality sugar
         and claim damages @ ` 25 per bag.

(iii) Where the contract is non-severable and the buyer has accepted either the whole
         goods or any part thereof. For Eg. If basmati rice and lower quality rice mixed together,
         the contract becomes non severable.

(iv) Where the fulfilment of any condition or warranty is excused by law by reason of
         impossibility or otherwise.

         Waiver of conditions

Voluntary Waiver                                   Compulsory Waiver
  Waives performance of contract                     Non-severability of contract
  Elect to treat condition as                        Fulfilment of conditions excused

warranty                                           by law

    2.4 EXPRESS AND IMPLIED CONDITIONS                            AND
             WARRANTIES (SECTION 14-17)

Condition and Warranty

May be                                             Express
either                                             Implied

`Conditions' and `Warranties' may be either express or implied. They are "express" when the
terms of the contract expressly state them. They are implied when, not being expressly
provided for. Implied conditions are incorporated by law in the contract of sale.

Express conditions are those, which are agreed upon between the parties at the time of
contract and are expressly provided in the contract.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.30  BUSINESS LAWS

Implied conditions, on the other hand, are those, which are presumed by law to be present
in the contract. It should be noted that an implied condition may be negated or waived by an
express agreement.

Following conditions are implied in a contract of sale of goods unless the circumstances of
the contract show a different intention.

                                      Implied Conditions

 Condition as to title                             Condition as to description

     Sale by sample                                Sale by sample as well as by
                                                               description
Condition as to quality
        or fitness                                        Condition as to
                                                          merchantability
    Condition as to
    wholesomeness

(i) Condition as to title [Section 14(a)]. In every contract of sale, unless there is an
         agreement to the contrary, the first implied condition on the part of the seller is that

         (a) in case of a sale, he has a right to sell the goods, and

         (b) in the case of an agreement to sell, he will have right to sell the goods at the
                   time when the property is to pass.

         In simple words, the condition implied is that the seller has the right to sell the goods
         (means he should be the real owner) at the time when the property is to pass. If the
         seller's title/ownership turns out to be defective, the buyer must return the goods to
         the true owner and recover the price from the seller.

         Example 4: A purchased a tractor from B who had no title to it. After 2 months, the
         true owner spotted the tractor and demanded it from A. Held that A was bound to
         hand over the tractor to its true owner and that A could sue B, the seller without title,
         for the recovery of the purchase price.

         Example 5: If A sells to B tins of condensed milk labelled `C.D.F. brand', and this is
         proved to be an infringement of N Company's trade mark, it will be a breach of implied
         condition that A had the right to sell. B in such a case will be entitled to reject the
         goods or take off the labels, and claim damages for the reduced value. If the seller has
         no title and the buyer has to make over the goods to the true owner, he will be entitled
         to refund of the price.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.31

(ii) Sale by description [Section 15]: Where there is a contract of sale of goods by
         description, there is an implied condition that the goods shall correspond with the
         description. This rule is based on the principle that "if you contract to sell peas, you
         cannot compel the buyer to take beans." The buyer is not bound to accept and pay for
         the goods which are not in accordance with the description of goods.

         Thus, it has to be determined whether the buyer has undertaken to purchase the goods
         by their description, i.e., whether the description was essential for identifying the
         goods where the buyer had agreed to purchase. If that is required and the goods
         tendered do not correspond with the description, it would be breach of condition
         entitling the buyer to reject the goods.

         It is a condition which goes to the root of the contract and the breach of it entitles the
         buyer to reject the goods whether the buyer is able to inspect them or not.

         Example 6: A at Kolkata sells to B twelve bags of "waste silk" on its way from
         Murshidabad to Kolkata. There is an implied condition that the silk shall be such as is
         known in the market as "Waste Silk". If it not, B is entitled to reject the goods.

         Example 7: A ship was contracted to be sold as "copper-fastened vessel" but actually
         it was only partly copper-fastened. Held that goods did not correspond to description
         and hence could be returned or if buyer took the goods, he could claim damages for
         breach.

         The Act, however, does not define `description'.

         (i) where the class or kind to which the goods belong has been specified, e.g.,
                   `Egyptian cotton', "java sugar", etc., defining the category of good

         (ii) where the goods have been described by certain characteristics essential to
                   their identification, e.g., jute bales of specified shipment, steel of specific
                   dimension, etc.

         It may be noted that the description in these cases assumes that form of a statement
         or representation as regards the identity of particular goods by reference to the place
         of origin or mode of packing, etc. Whether or not such a statement or representation
         is essential to the identity of the goods is a question of fact depending, in each case,
         on the construction of the contract.

(iii) Sale by sample [Section 17]: In a contract of sale by sample, there is an implied
         condition that

         (a) the bulk shall correspond with the sample in quality;

         (b) the buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of comparing the bulk with the
                   sample,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.32  BUSINESS LAWS

                   Example 8: In a case of sale by sample of two parcels of wheat, the seller
                   allowed the buyer an inspection of the smaller parcel but not of the larger
                   parcel. In this case, it was held that the buyer was entitled to refuse to take the
                   parcels of wheat.

         (c) the goods shall be free from any defect rendering them un-merchantable,
                   which would not be apparent on reasonable examination of the sample. This
                   condition is applicable only with regard to defects, which could not be
                   discovered by an ordinary examination of the goods. If the defects are latent,
                   then the buyer can avoid the contract. This simply means that the goods shall
                   be free from any latent defect i.e. a hidden defect.

                   Example 9: A company sold certain shoes made of special sole by sample for
                   the French Army. The shoes were found to contain paper not discoverable by
                   ordinary inspection. Held, the buyer was entitled to the refund of the price plus
                   damages.

(iv) Sale by sample as well as by description [Section 15]: Where the goods are sold by
         sample as well as by description the implied condition is that the bulk of the goods
         supplied shall correspond both with the sample and the description. In case the goods
         correspond with the sample but do not tally with description or vice versa or both, the
         buyer can repudiate the contract.

         Example 10: A agreed with B to sell certain oil described as refined sunflower oil,
         warranted only equal to sample. The goods tendered were equal to sample but
         contained a mixture of hemp oil along with sunflower oil. Hence, B can reject the goods
         because the goods were as per sample but do not correspond to the description.

(v) Condition as to quality or fitness [Section 16(1)]: Ordinarily, there is no implied
         condition as to the quality or fitness of the goods sold for any particular purpose.

         However, the condition as to the reasonable fitness of goods for a particular purpose
         may be implied if the buyer had made known to the seller the purpose of his purchase
         and relied upon the skill and judgment of the seller to select the best goods and the
         seller has ordinarily been dealing in those goods. This implied condition will not apply
         if the goods have been sold under a trademark or a patent name.

         There is implied condition of the part of the seller that the goods supplied shall be
         reasonably fit for the purpose for which the buyer wants them, provided the following
         conditions are fulfilled:

         (a) The buyer should have made known to the seller the particular purpose for
                   which goods are required.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.33

         (b) The buyer should rely on the skill and judgement of the seller.

         (c) The goods must be of a description dealt in by the seller, whether he be a
                   manufacturer or not.

         In some cases, the purpose may be ascertained from the conduct of the parties or form
         the nature of the goods sold. Where the goods can be used for only one purpose, the
         buyer need not tell the seller the purpose for which he requires the goods.

         Example 11: `A' bought a set of false teeth from `B', a dentist. But the set was not fit
         for `A's mouth. `A' rejected the set of teeth and claimed the refund of price. It was held
         that `A' was entitled to do so as the only purpose for which he wanted the set of teeth
         was not fulfilled.

         Example 12: `A' went to `B's shop and asked for a `Merrit' sewing machine. `B' gave `A'
         the same and `A' paid the price. `A' relied on the trade name of the machine rather
         than on the skill and judgement of the seller `B'. In this case, there is no implied
         condition as to fitness of the machine for buyer's particular purpose.

         As a general rule, it is the duty of the buyer to examine the goods thoroughly before
         he buys them in order to satisfy himself that the goods will be suitable for his purpose
         for which he is buying them. This is known as rule of caveat emptor which means "Let
         the buyer beware".

(vi) Condition as to Merchantability [Section 16(2)]: Where goods are bought by
         description from a seller who deals in goods of that description (whether he is the
         manufacturer or producer or not), there is an implied condition that the goods shall
         be of merchantable quality.

         There are two requirements for this condition to apply:

         (a) Goods should be bought by description.

         (b) The seller should be a dealer in goods of that description.

         Provided that, if the buyer has examined the goods, there shall be no implied condition
         as regards defects which such examination ought to have revealed.

         The expression "merchantable quality", though not defined, nevertheless connotes
         goods of such a quality and in such a condition a man of ordinary prudence would
         accept them as goods of that description. It does not imply any legal right or legal title
         to sell.

         Example 13: If a person orders motor horns from a manufacturer of horns, and the
         horns supplied are scratched and damaged owing to bad packing, he is entitled to
         reject them as unmerchantable.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.34  BUSINESS LAWS

         Example 14: A bought a black velvet cloth from C and found it to be damaged by
         white ants. Held, the condition as to merchantability was broken.

(vii) Condition as to wholesomeness: In the case of eatables and provisions, in addition
         to the implied condition as to merchantability, there is another implied condition that
         the goods shall be wholesome.

         Example 15: A supplied F with milk. The milk contained typhoid germs. F's wife
         consumed the milk and was infected and died. Held, there was a breach of condition
         as to fitness and A was liable to pay damages.

Implied Warranties: It is a warranty which the law implies into the
contract of sale. In other words, it is the stipulation which has not
been included in the contract of sale in express words. But the law
presumes that the parties have incorporated it into their contract. It
will be interesting to know that implied warranties are read into every
contract of sale unless they are expressly excluded by the express agreement of the parties.

These may also be excluded by the course of dealings between the parties or by usage of
trade (Section 62).

                                        Implied Warranties

warranty as to                                                          warranty as to quality or
 undisturbed                                                            fitness by usage of trade
  possession
                                                      disclosure of
                 Warranty as to non-               dangerous nature
                       existence of
                                                        of goods
                     encumbrances

The examination of Sections 14 and 16 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 discloses the following
implied warranties:

1. Warranty as to undisturbed possession [Section 14(b)]: An implied warranty that
         the buyer shall have and enjoy quiet possession of the goods. That is to say, if the
         buyer having got possession of the goods, is later on disturbed in his possession, he
         is entitled to sue the seller for the breach of the warranty.

         Example 16: X buys a laptop from Y. After the purchase, X spends some money on its
         repair and uses it for some time. Unknown to the parties, it turns out that the laptop
         was stolen and was taken from X and delivered to its rightful owner. Y shall be held
         responsible for a breach and X is entitled to damages of not only the price but also the
         cost of repairs.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.35

2. Warranty as to non-existence of encumbrances [Section 14(c)]: An implied
         warranty that the goods shall be free from any charge or encumbrance in favour of any
         third party not declared or known to the buyer before or at the time the contract is
         entered into.

         Example 17: A pledges his car with C for a loan of `15,0000 and promises him to give
         its possession the next day. A, then sells the car immediately to B, who purchased it on
         good faith, without knowing the fact. B, may either ask A to clear the loan or himself
         may pay the money and then, file a suit against A for recovery of the money with
         interest.

3. Warranty as to quality or fitness by usage of trade [Section 16(3)]: An implied
         warranty as to quality or fitness for a particular purpose may be annexed or attached
         by the usage of trade.

         Regarding implied condition or warranty as to the quality or fitness for any particular
         purpose of goods supplied, the rule is `let the buyer beware' i.e., the seller is under no
         duty to reveal unflattering truths about the goods sold, but this rule has certain
         exceptions.

4. Disclosure of dangerous nature of goods: Where the goods are dangerous in nature
         and the buyer is ignorant of the danger, the seller must warn the buyer of the probable
         danger. If there is a breach of warranty, the seller may be liable in damages.

    2.5 CAVEAT EMPTOR

In case of sale of goods, the doctrine `Caveat Emptor' means `let the buyer beware'. When
sellers display their goods in the open market, it is for the buyers to make a proper selection
or choice of the goods. If the goods turn out to be defective, he cannot hold the seller liable.
The seller is in no way responsible for the bad selection of the buyer. The seller is not bound
to disclose the defects in the goods which he is selling.

It is the duty of the buyer to satisfy himself before buying the goods that the goods will serve
the purpose for which they are being bought. If the goods turn out to be defective or do not
serve his purpose or if he depends on his own skill or judgment, the buyer cannot hold the
seller responsible.

The rule of Caveat Emptor is laid down in the Section 16, which states that, "subject to the
provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force, there is no implied
warranty or condition as to the quality or fitness for any particular purpose of goods supplied
under a contract of sale".

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    3.36  BUSINESS LAWS

Following are the conditions to be satisfied:

-   if the buyer had made known to the seller the purpose of his purchase, and

-   the buyer relied on the seller's skill and judgement, and

-   seller's business to supply goods of that description (Section 16).

Example 18: A sold pigs to B. These pigs being infected, caused typhoid to other healthy pigs
of the buyer. It was held that the seller was not bound to disclose that the pigs were unhealthy.
The rule of the law being "Caveat Emptor".

Example 19: A purchases a horse from B. A needed the horse for riding but he did not mention
this fact to B. The horse is not suitable for riding but is suitable only for being driven in the
carriage. Caveat emptor rule applies here and so A can neither reject the horse nor can claim
compensation from B.

Exceptions: The doctrine of Caveat Emptor is, however, subject to the following exceptions:

1.  Fitness as to quality or use: Where the buyer makes known to the seller the particular

    purpose for which the goods are required, so as to show that he relies on the seller's

    skill or judgment and the goods are of a description which is in the course of seller's

    business to supply, it is the duty of the seller to supply such goods as are reasonably

    fit for that purpose [Section 16 (1)].

    Example 20: An order was placed for some trucks to be used for heavy traffic in a hilly
    country. The trucks supplied by the seller were unfit for this purpose and broke down.
    There is a breach of condition as to fitness.

    In Priest vs. Last, P, a draper, purchased a hot water bottle from a retail chemist, P
    asked the chemist if it would stand boiling water. The Chemist told him that the bottle
    was meant to hold hot water. The bottle burst when hot water was poured into it and
    injured his wife. It was held that the chemist shall be liable to pay damages to P, as he
    knew that the bottle was purchased for the purpose of being used as a hot water bottle.

    Where the article can be used for only one particular purpose, the buyer need not tell
    the seller the purpose for which he required the goods. But where the article can be
    used for a number of purposes, the buyer should tell the seller the purpose for which
    he requires the goods, if he wants to make the seller responsible.

    In Bombay Burma Trading Corporation Ltd. vs. Aga Muhammad, timber was
    purchased for the express purpose of using it as railways sleepers and when it was
    found to be unfit for the purpose, the Court held that the contract could be avoided.

   © The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.37

2. Goods purchased under patent or brand name: In case where the goods are
         purchased under its patent name or brand name, there is no implied condition that
         the goods shall be fit for any particular purpose [Section 16(1)]. Here, the buyer is
         relying on the particular brand name.

3. Goods sold by description: Where the goods are sold by description there is an
         implied condition that the goods shall correspond with the description [Section 15]. If
         it is not so, then seller is responsible.

4. Goods of Merchantable Quality: Where the goods are bought by description from a
         seller who deals in goods of that description there is an implied condition that the
         goods shall be of merchantable quality. The rule of Caveat Emptor is not applicable for
         latent defects. But where the buyer has examined the goods, this rule shall apply if the
         defects were such which ought to have not been revealed by ordinary examination
         [Section 16(2)].

5. Sale by sample: Where the goods are bought by sample, this rule of Caveat Emptor
         does not apply if the bulk does not correspond with the sample [Section 17].

6. Goods by sample as well as description: Where the goods are bought by sample as
         well as description, the rule of Caveat Emptor is not applicable in case the goods do
         not correspond with both the sample and description or either of the condition
         [Section 15].

7. Trade Usage: An implied warranty or condition as to quality or fitness for a particular
         purpose may be annexed by the usage of trade and if the seller deviates from that, this
         rule of Caveat Emptor is not applicable [Section 16(3)].

         Example 21: In readymade garment business, there is an implied condition by usage
         of trade that the garments shall be reasonably fit on the buyer.

8. Seller actively conceals a defect or is guilty of fraud: Where the seller sells the
         goods by making some misrepresentation or fraud and the buyer relies on it or when
         the seller actively conceals some defect in the goods so that the same could not be
         discovered by the buyer on a reasonable examination, then the rule of Caveat Emptor
         will not apply. In such a case the buyer has a right to avoid the contract and claim
         damages.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.38  BUSINESS LAWS

SUMMARY

While entering into a contract of sale, certain stipulations are put by both the parties i.e. the
buyer and the seller. These stipulations with reference to goods may be `conditions' or
`warranties' depending upon the construction of the contract. A stipulation essential to the
main purpose of the contract is a `condition' whereas collateral stipulations are called
warranties. Breach of a `condition' gives right to repudiate the contract and to claim damages
whereas Breach of a `Warranty' gives right to claim damages only. Every contract of sales have
certain conditions and warranties implied by law. Besides, the parties may provide for
`conditions' and `warranties' by an express agreement.

Regarding implied condition or warranty as to the quality of fitness for any particular purpose
of goods supplied, the rule is `let the buyer beware' i.e., the seller is under no duty to reveal
unflattering truths about the goods sold, but this rule has certain exceptions.

                                 Conditions & Warranty

Conditions [Sec. 12(2)]                            Warranty [Sec. 12(3)]

Meaning: A stipulation which is                    Meaning: A stipulation which is
essential to the main purpose of the               collateral to the main purpose of the
contract.                                          contract.

Implied conditions                                 Implied warranties
1. Condition as to title                           1.Warranty of undisturbed
2. Sale by description & Sample                    possession
3. Condition as to quality or fitness              2. Warranty of freedom from
4. Condition as to merchantability                 encumbrances.
5.Condition as to wholesomeness                    3. Warranty as to quality or fitness
                                                   by usage of trade.
                                                   4. Warranty to disclose dangerous
                                                   nature of goods.

Note: 1. If there is a breach of a condition, the aggrieved party can repudiate the
contract of sale; in case of a breach of a warranty, the aggrieved party can claim damages
only.
2. A breach of a condition may be treated as a breach of a warranty (by voluntary waiver
or by accepting the goods by buyer) but a breach of a warranty, however, cannot be
treated as a breach of a condition.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
             THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                                  3.39

                                   When Condition treated as Warrnty
As a result of which the buyer loses his right to rescind the contract and can claim damages only

             Voluntary Waiver                                  Compulsory Waiver

- Waives performance of contract                               - Non-severability of contract
- Elect to treat condition as warranty                         -Fulfillment of conditions excused by

                                               Caveat Emptor

This means "let the buyer beware", i.e. its buyer's duty to examine thoroughly when he buys the goods

                                                 Exceptions

Buyer makes  Goods                                 For         Sale by    In case of  Consent
known the    purchased                             merchant    descripti  condition   of the
particular   under its                             able        on &       implied     buyer, in
purpose.     patent name                           quality of  Sample.    by          a
             or brand                              goods.                 custom.     contract
             name.                                                                    or sale, is
                                                                                      obtained
                                                                                      by the
                                                                                      seller by
                                                                                      fraud.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. A stipulation which is essential to the main purpose of the contract is called-
         (a) Warranty
         (b) Guarantee
         (c) Condition
         (d) Indemnity

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.40  BUSINESS LAWS

2. Breach of condition gives the aggrieved party-
         (a) Right to sue for damages
         (b) Right to repudiate the contract
         (c) Both (a) and (b)
         (d) None of these

3. Condition may be treated as a warranty when there is ­
         (a) Waiver of condition by the buyer
         (b) Buyer elects to treat breach of condition as a breach of warranty
         (c) Acceptance of goods by the buyer in case of non-severable of contract of sale
         (d) All of the above

4. The doctrine of Caveat Emptor does not apply, when
         (a) the goods are bought by sample.
         (b) the goods are bought by sample as well as description.
         (c) The exact purpose is known to the seller and is a regular dealer
         (d) All of the above

5. Which of the following is not an implied condition in a contract of sale?
         (a) condition as to title.
         (b) condition as to description
         (c) condition as to free from encumbrance.
         (d) condition as to sample.

6. The conditions and warranties may be in the form of
         (a) express.
         (b) implied.
         (c) either (a) or (b).
         (d) none of the above.

7. Which one of the following is not an implied warranty
         (a) warranty as to undisturbed possession.
         (b) warranty as to existence of encumbrance.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.41

         (c) disclosure of dangerous nature of goods.
         (d) warranty as to quality or fitness by usage of trade.
8. In case of goods sold by sample, the goods should correspond with the sample other wise
         (a) buyer can reject the goods.
         (b) buyer cannot reject the goods.
         (c) contract is automatically terminated.
         (d) seller is liable to punishment.
9. M, a shopkeeper, sold a Television set to N, who purchased it in good faith. The set had
         some manufacturing defect and it did not work after a few days in spite of repairs. In this
         case, the television was not merchantable as it was not fit for ordinary purpose.
         (a) the buyer has no right to reject the television.
         (b) the buyer has the right to reject the television and to have refund of the price.
         (c) both of the above.
         (d) none of the above [(a) & (b)]
10. Where the buyer is deprived to goods by their true owner, then the buyer
         (a) may recover the price for breach of the condition as to title.
         (b) can not recover the price for breach of the condition as to title.
         (c) either (a) or (b)
         (d) none of the above.
11. Where goods are bought by description from a seller who deals in goods of that
         description, what is the implied condition?
         (a) That goods shall be of merchantable equality
         (b) That the buyer shall have reasonable opportunity of comparing the bulk with the

                   sample
         (c) The goods shall be of excellent quality
         (d) The goods shall be free from defects
12. A warranty is stipulation
         (a) Essential to the main purpose of the contract
         (b) Collateral to the main purpose of the contract

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.42  BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) Very important to the seller

         (d) Very important to the buyer

13. In a sale by sample and description, there is an implied condition

         (a) That bulk of the goods correspond with the sample

         (b) That bulk of goods must correspond to the description as well as the sample
                   thereof

         (c) The bulk of goods must correspond either to the description or to the sample

         (d) The bulk of goods must correspond to the description only

Descriptive Questions

1. M/s Woodworth & Associates, a firm dealing with the wholesale and retail buying and
         selling of various kinds of wooden logs, customized as per the requirement of the
         customers. They dealt with Rose wood, Mango wood, Teak wood, Burma wood etc.

         Mr. Das, a customer came to the shop and asked for wooden logs measuring 4 inches
         broad and 8 feet long as required by the carpenter. Mr. Das specifically mentioned that
         he required the wood which would be best suited for the purpose of making wooden
         doors and window frames. The Shop owner agreed and arranged the wooden pieces cut
         into as per the buyers requirements.

         The carpenter visited Mr. Das's house next day, and he found that the seller has supplied
         Mango Tree wood which would most unsuitable for the purpose. The carpenter asked Mr.
         Das to return the wooden logs as it would not meet his requirements.

         The Shop owner refused to accept return of the wooden logs on the plea that logs were
         cut to specific requirements of Mr. Das and hence could not be resold.

         (i) Explain the duty of the buyer as well as the seller according to the doctrine of
                   "Caveat Emptor".

         (ii) Whether Mr. Das would be able to get the money back or the right kind of wood
                   as required serving his purpose?

2. Mrs. Geeta went to the local rice and wheat wholesale shop and asked for 100 kgs of
         Basmati rice. The Shopkeeper quoted the price of the same as ` 125 per kg to which she
         agreed. Mrs. Geeta insisted that she would like to see the sample of what will be provided
         to her by the shopkeeper before she agreed upon such purchase. The shopkeeper showed
         her a bowl of rice as sample. The sample exactly corresponded to the entire lot.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.43

         The buyer examined the sample casually without noticing the fact that even though the
         sample was that of Basmati Rice but it contained a mix of long and short grains. The
         cook on opening the bags complained that the dish if prepared with the rice would not
         taste the same as the quality of rice was not as per requirement of the dish. Now Mrs.
         Geeta wants to file a suit of fraud against the seller alleging him of selling mix of good
         and cheap quality rice. Will she be successful?

         Decide the fate of the case and options open to the buyer for grievance redressal as per
         the provisions of Sale of Goods Act, 1930?

         What would be your answer in case Mrs. Geeta specified her exact requirement as to
         length of rice?

3. X consults Y, a motor-car dealer for a car suitable for touring purposes to promote the
         sale of his product. Y suggests `Santro' and X accordingly buys it from Y. The car turns
         out to be unfit for touring purposes. What remedy X is having now under the Sale of
         Goods Act, 1930?

4. Mrs. G bought a tweed coat from P. When she used the coat she got rashes on her skin
         as her skin was abnormally sensitive. But she did not make this fact known to the seller
         i.e. P. Mrs. G filled a case against the seller to recover damages. Can she recover damages
         under the Sale of Goods Act, 1930?

5. Certain goods were sold by sample by A to B, who in turn sold the same goods by sample
         to C and C by sample sold the goods to D. The goods were not according to the sample.
         Therefore, D who found the deviation of the goods from the sample rejected the goods
         and gave a notice to C. C sued B and B sued A. Advise B and C under the Sale of Goods
         Act, 1930.

6. A person purchased bread from a baker's shop. The piece of bread contained a stone in
         it which broke buyer's tooth while eating. What are the rights available to the buyer
         against the seller under the Sale of Goods Act, 1930?

7. Q asked P, the seller for washing machine which is suitable for washing woollen clothes.
         Mr. P showed him a particular machine which Mr. Q liked and paid for it. Later on,
         machine delivered and was found unfit for washing woollen clothes. He immediately
         informed Mr. P about the delivery of wrong machine. Mr. P refused to exchange the same,
         saying that the contract was complete after the delivery of washing machine and
         payment of price. With reference to the provisions of Sale of Goods Act,1930 discuss
         whether Mr. P is right in refusing to exchange the washing machine?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         3.44         BUSINESS LAWS

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.  (c)  2.      (c)  3.                           (d)  4.  (d)  5.  (c)  6. (c)

7.  (b)  8.      (a)  9.                           (b) 10. (a) 11. (a) 12. (b)

13. (b)

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. (i) Duty of the buyer according to the doctrine of "Caveat Emptor": In case of
                   sale of goods, the doctrine `Caveat Emptor' means `let the buyer beware'. When
                   sellers display their goods in the open market, it is for the buyers to make a
                   proper selection or choice of the goods. If the goods turn out to be defective
                   he cannot hold the seller liable. The seller is in no way responsible for the bad
                   selection of the buyer. The seller is not bound to disclose the defects in the
                   goods which he is selling.

                   Duty of the seller according to the doctrine of "Caveat Emptor": The
                   following exceptions to the Caveat Emptor are the duties of the seller:

                   1. Fitness as to quality or use

                   2. Goods purchased under patent or brand name

                   3. Goods sold by description

                   4. Goods of Merchantable Quality

                   5. Sale by sample

                   6. Goods by sample as well as description

                   7. Trade usage

                   8. Seller actively conceals a defect or is guilty of fraud

         (ii) As Mr. Das has specifically mentioned that he required the wood which would
                   be best suited for the purpose of making wooden doors and window frames
                   but the seller supplied Mango tree wood which is most unsuitable for the
                   purpose. Mr. Das is entitled to get the money back or the right kind of wood as
                   required serving his purpose. It is the duty of the seller to supply such goods
                   as are reasonably fit for the purpose mentioned by buyer. [Section 16(1) of the
                   Sale of Goods Act, 1930]

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE SALE OF GOODS ACT, 1930                        3.45

2. As per the provisions of Sub-Section (2) of Section 17 of the Sale of Goods Act,
         1930, in a contract of sale by sample, there is an implied condition that:

         (a) the bulk shall correspond with the sample in quality;

         (b) the buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of comparing the bulk with the
                   sample.

                   (i) In the instant case, in the light of the provisions of Sub-Clause (b) of
                             Sub-Section (2) of Section 17 of the Act, Mrs. Geeta will not be
                             successful as she casually examined the sample of rice (which exactly
                             corresponded to the entire lot) without noticing the fact that even
                             though the sample was that of Basmati Rice but it contained a mix of
                             long and short grains.

                   (ii) In the instant case, the buyer does not have any option available to her
                             for grievance redressal.

                   (iii) In case Mrs. Geeta specified her exact requirement as to length of rice,
                             then there is an implied condition that the goods shall correspond with
                             the description. If it is not so, then the seller will be held liable.

3. Condition and warranty (Section 12): A stipulation in a contract of sale with
         reference to goods which are the subject thereof may be a condition or a warranty.
         [Sub-section (1)]

         "A condition is a stipulation essential to the main purpose of the contract, the breach
         of which gives rise to a right to treat the contract as repudiated". [Sub-section (2)]

         In the instant case, the term that the `car should be suitable for touring purposes' is a
         condition of the contract. It is so vital that its non-fulfilment defeats the very purpose
         for which X purchases the car.

         X is therefore entitled to reject the car and have refund of the price.

4. According to Section 16(1) of Sales of Goods Act, 1930, normally in a contract of sale
         there is no implied condition or warranty as to quality or fitness for any particular
         purpose of goods supplied. The general rule is that of "Caveat Emptor" that is "let the
         buyer beware". But where the buyer expressly or impliedly makes known to the seller
         the particular purpose for which the goods are required and also relies on the seller's
         skill and judgement and that this is the business of the seller to sell such goods in the
         ordinary course of his business, the buyer can make the seller responsible.

         In the given case, Mrs. G purchased the tweed coat without informing the seller i.e. P
         about the sensitive nature of her skin. Therefore, she cannot make the seller
         responsible on the ground that the tweed coat was not suitable for her skin. Mrs. G

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.46  BUSINESS LAWS

         cannot treat it as a breach of implied condition as to fitness and quality and has no
         right to recover damages from the seller.

5. In the instant case, D who noticed the deviation of goods from the sample can reject
         the goods and treat it as a breach of implied condition as to sample which provides
         that when the goods are sold by sample the goods must correspond to the sample in
         quality and the buyer should be given reasonable time and opportunity of comparing
         the bulk with the sample. Whereas C can recover only damages from B and B can
         recover damages from A. For C and B it will not be treated as a breach of implied
         condition as to sample as they have accepted and sold the goods according to Section
         13(2) of the Sales of Goods Act, 1930. Hence, they cannot reject the goods, but claim
         the damages.

6. This is a case related to implied condition as to wholesomeness which provides that
         the eatables and provisions must be wholesome that is they must be fit for human
         consumption. In this case, the piece of bread contained a stone which broke buyer's
         tooth while eating, thereby considered unfit for consumption. Hence, the buyer can
         treat it as breach of implied condition as to wholesomeness and can also claim
         damages from the seller.

7. According to Section 15 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, whenever the goods are sold
         as per sample as well as by description, the implied condition is that the goods must
         correspond to both sample as well as description. Further under Sale of Goods Act,
         1930 when the buyer makes known to the seller the particular purpose for which the
         goods are required and he relies on his judgment and skill of the seller, it is the duty
         of the seller to supply such goods which are fit for that purpose. Mr. Q has informed
         to Mr. P that he wanted the washing machine for washing woollen clothes. However,
         the machine which was delivered by Mr. P was unfit for the purpose for which Mr. Q
         wanted the machine. Therefore, Mr. Q can either repudiate the contract or claim the
         refund of the price paid by him.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
