THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                                           4.57

UNIT ­ 3: REGISTRATION AND DISSOLUTION OF A
                                  FIRM

                                          LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to understand-
 About mode of getting a firm registered with the authorities.
 The effect of registration of a firm upon the rights of partners' inter-

       se and the rights of the third parties.
 The effect of non-registration on rights of partners and the third

       parties.
 The various circumstances when a firm is dissolved.
 The consequences and the effects of the dissolution upon rights and

       liabilities of various parties.

  UNIT OVERVIEW

Registration and dissolution of a firm

Mode of effecting  Consequences of                 Dissolution of
   Registration    Non-registration                      firm

                   Dissolution without the intervention              Dissolution by
                         of court (Section 40 to 43)               court (Section 44)

Dissolution by      Dissolution by                   Dissolution on the          Dissolution by
 Agreement         operation of Law                 happening of certain         notice (Section
 (Section 40)                                      contingencies (Section
                    or compulsory                                                       43)
                      dissolution                              42)
                      (Section 41)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.58  BUSINESS LAWS

    3.1 REGISTRATION OF FIRMS

APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION (SECTION 58): (1) The registration of a firm may be
effected at any time by sending by post or delivering to the Registrar of the area in which any
place of business of the firm is situated or proposed to be situated, a statement in the
prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fee, stating-

(a) The firm's name

(b) The place or principal place of business of the firm,

(c) The names of any other places where the firm carries on business,

(d) the date when each partner joined the firm,

(e) the names in full and permanent addresses of the partners, and

(f) the duration of the firm.

The statement shall be signed by all the partners, or by their agents specially authorised in
this behalf.

(1) Each person signing the statement shall also verify it in the manner prescribed.

(2) A firm name shall not contain any of the following words, namely:-

         Note: `Crown', Emperor', `Empress', `Empire', `Imperial', `King', `Queen', `Royal', or words
         expressing or implying the sanction, approval or patronage of Government except
         when the State Government signifies its consent to the use of such words as part of
         the firm-name by order in writing.

REGISTRATION (SECTION 59): When the Registrar is satisfied that the provisions of Section
58 have been duly complied with, he shall record an entry of the statement in a Register called
the Register of Firms and shall file the statement. Then he shall issue a certificate of
Registration. However, registration is deemed to be completed as soon as an application in
the prescribed form with the prescribed fee and necessary details concerning the particulars
of partnership is delivered to the Registrar. The recording of an entry in the register of firms
is a routine duty of Registrar.

Registration may also be effected even after a suit has been filed by the firm but in that case
it is necessary to withdraw the suit first and get the firm registered and then file a fresh suit.

LATE REGISTRATION ON PAYMENT OF PENALTY (SECTION 59A-1): If the statement in
respect of any firm is not sent or delivered to the Registrar within the time specified in sub-
section (1A) of section 58, then the firm may be registered on payment, to the Registrar, of a
penalty of one hundred rupees per year of delay or a part thereof.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                            4.59

    3.2 CONSEQUENCES                               OF  NON-REGISTRATION

    (SECTION 69)

Under the English Law, the registration of firms is compulsory. Therefore, there is a penalty
for non-registration of firms. But the Indian Partnership Act does not make the registration of
firms compulsory nor does it impose any penalty for non-registration. However, under
Section 69, non-registration of partnership gives rise to a number of disabilities which we
shall presently discuss. Although registration of firms is not compulsory, yet the consequences
or disabilities of non-registration have a persuasive pressure for their registration. These
disabilities briefly are as follows:

(i) No suit in a civil court by firm or other co-partners against third party: The firm
         or any other person on its behalf cannot bring an action against the third party for
         breach of contract entered into by the firm, unless the firm is registered and the
         persons suing are or have been shown in the register of firms as partners in the firm.
         In other words, a registered firm can only file a suit against a third party and the
         persons suing have been in the register of firms as partners in the firm.

(ii) No relief to partners for set-off of claim: If an action is brought against the firm by
         a third party, then neither the firm nor the partner can claim any set-off, if the suit be
         valued for more than ` 100 or pursue other proceedings to enforce the rights arising
         from any contract.

(iii) Aggrieved partner cannot bring legal action against other partner or the firm: A
         partner of an unregistered firm (or any other person on his behalf) is precluded from
         bringing legal action against the firm or any person alleged to be or to have been a
         partner in the firm. But, such a person may sue for dissolution of the firm or for
         accounts and realization of his share in the firm's property where the firm is dissolved.

(iv) Third party can sue the firm: In case of an unregistered firm, an action can be brought
         against the firm by a third party.

Exceptions: Non-registration of a firm does not, however effect the following rights:

1.  The right of third parties to sue the firm or any partner.

2.  The right of partners to sue for the dissolution of the firm or for the settlement of the

    accounts of a dissolved firm, or for realization of the property of a dissolved firm.

3.  The power of an Official Assignees, Receiver of Court to release the property of the

    insolvent partner and to bring an action.

4.  The right to sue or claim a set-off if the value of suit does not exceed ` 100 in value.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           4.60  BUSINESS LAWS

5.  The right to suit and proceeding instituted by legal representatives or heirs of the

    deceased partner of a firm for accounts of the firm or to realise the property of the

    firm.

Example 1: A & Co. is registered as a partnership firm in 2017 with A, B and C partners. In
2018, A dies. In 2019, B and C sue X in the name and on behalf of A & Co. without fresh
registration. Now the first question for our consideration is whether the suit is maintainable.

As regards the question whether in the case of a registered firm (whose business was carried
on after its dissolution by death of one of the partners), a suit can be filed by the remaining
partners in respect of any subsequent dealings or transactions without notifying to the
Registrar of Firms, the changes in the constitution of the firm, it was decided that the
remaining partners should sue in respect of such subsequent dealings or transactions even
though the firm was not registered again after such dissolution and no notice of the partner
was given to the Registrar.

The test applied in these cases was whether the plaintiff satisfied the only two requirements
of Section 69 (2) of the Act namely,

(i) the suit must be instituted by or on behalf of the firm which had been registered;

(ii) the person suing had been shown as partner in the register of firms. In view of this
         position of law, the suit is in the case by B and C against X in the name and on behalf
         of A & Co. is maintainable.

Now, in the above example, what difference would it make, if in 2019 B and C had taken
a new partner, D, and then filed a suit against X without fresh registration?

Where a new partner is introduced, the fact is to be notified to Registrar who shall make a
record of the notice in the entry relating to the firm in the Register of firms. Therefore, the
firm cannot sue as D's (new partner's) name has not been entered in the register of firms. It
was pointed out that in the second requirement, the phrase "person suing" means persons in
the sense of individuals whose names appear in the register as partners and who must be all
partners in the firm at the date of the suit.

    3.3 DISSOLUTION OF FIRM (SECTIONS 39 - 47)

According to Section 39 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, the dissolution of partnership
between all partners of a firm is called the `dissolution of the firm'.

Thus, the dissolution of firm means the discontinuation of the legal relation existing between
all the partners of the firm. But when only one or more partners retires or becomes
incapacitated from acting as a partner due to death, insolvency or insanity, the partnership,
i.e. the relationship between such a partner and other is dissolved, but the rest may decide to

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                                 4.61

continue. In such cases, there is in practice, no dissolution of the firm. The particular partner
goes out, but the remaining partners carry on the business of the firm, it is called dissolution
of partnership. In the case of dissolution of the firm, on the other hand, the whole firm is
dissolved. The partnership terminates as between each and every partner of the firm.

  Dissolution of Firm Vs. Dissolution of Partnership

S. No. Basis of Difference        Dissolution of Firm       Dissolution of Partnership
  1. Continuation of        It involves discontinuation of
           business         business in partnership.        It does not affect

  2. Winding up             It involves winding up of the   continuation of business. It
                            firm and requires realization
  3. Order of court         of assets and settlement of     involves only reconstitution
  4. Scope                  liabilities.
  5. Final closure of       A firm may be dissolved by the  of the firm.
                            order of the court.
           books            It necessarily involves         It            involves  only
                            dissolution of partnership.
                            It involves final closure of    reconstitution and requires
                            books of the firm.
                                                            only revaluation of assets

                                                            and liabilities of the firm.

                                                            Dissolution of partnership is

                                                            not ordered by the court.

                                                            It may or may not involve

                                                            dissolution of firm.

                                                            It does not involve final

                                                            closure of the books of the

                                                            firm.

Modes of Dissolution of a firm (Sections 40-44)

The dissolution of partnership firm may be in any of the following ways:

1. DISSOLUTION WITHOUT THE ORDER OF THE COURT OR VOLUNTARY
         DISSOLUTION:

It consists of following four types:

(i) Dissolution by Agreement (Section 40):

Section 40 gives right to the partners to dissolve the partnership by agreement
with the consent of all the partners or in accordance with a contract between
the partners. `Contract between the partners' means a contract already made.

(ii) Compulsory dissolution (Section 41):

A firm is compulsorily dissolved

  by the happening of any event which makes it unlawful for the business

  of the firm to be carried on or for the partners to carry it on in

  partnership.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.62  BUSINESS LAWS

         However, when more than one separate adventure or undertaking is carried on
         by the firm, the illegality of one or more shall not of itself cause the dissolution
         of the firm in respect of its lawful adventures and undertakings.

         Example 2: A firm is carrying on the business of trading a particular chemical
         and a law is passed which bans on the trading of such a particular chemical. The
         business of the firm becomes unlawful and so the firm will have to be
         compulsorily dissolved.

(iii) Dissolution on the happening of certain contingencies (Section 42):

         Subject to contract between the partners, a firm can be dissolved on the
         happening of any of the following contingencies-

       Where the firm is constituted for a fixed term,
                     on the expiry of that term

      Where the firm is constituted to carry out one or
          more adventures or undertaking, then by
                         completion thereof

                  by the death of a partner, and

      by the adjudication of a partner as an insolvent.

(iv) Dissolution by notice of partnership at will (Section 43):

         (1) Where the partnership is at will, the firm may be dissolved by any
                   partner giving notice in writing to all the other partners of his intention
                   to dissolve the firm.

         (2) In case date is mentioned in the Notice: The firm is dissolved as from
                   the date mentioned in the notice as the date of dissolution, or in case
                   no date is so mentioned, as from the date of the communication of the
                   notice.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                 4.63

(2) DISSOLUTION BY THE COURT (SECTION 44):

Court may, at the suit of the partner, dissolve a firm on any of the following ground:

(a) Insanity/unsound mind: Where a partner (not a sleeping partner) has become
         of unsound mind, the court may dissolve the firm on a suit of the other partners
         or by the next friend of the insane partner. Temporary sickness is no ground for
         dissolution of firm.

Example 3: A, B and C are partners in a firm. A has severe infection and got
typhoid. Due to this, he was not able to conduct business for few weeks. This
kind of illness cannot be treated as the ground for dissolution.

(b) Permanent incapacity: When a partner, other than the partner suing, has
         become in any way permanently incapable of performing his duties as partner,
         then the court may dissolve the firm. Such permanent incapacity may result
         from physical disability or illness etc.

(c) Misconduct: Where a partner, other than the partner suing, is guilty of conduct
         which is likely to affect prejudicially the carrying on of business, the court may
         order for dissolution of the firm, by giving regard to the nature of business. It
         is not necessary that misconduct must relate to the conduct of the business.
         The important point is the adverse effect of misconduct on the business. In
         each case nature of business will decide whether an act is misconduct or not.

(d) Persistent breach of agreement: Where a partner other than the partner suing,
         wilfully or persistently commits breach of agreements relating to the
         management of the affairs of the firm or the conduct of its business, or
         otherwise so conduct himself in matters relating to the business that it is not
         reasonably practicable for other partners to carry on the business in partnership
         with him, then the court may dissolve the firm at the instance of any of the
         partners. Following comes in to category of breach of contract:

  Embezzlement,

  Keeping erroneous accounts

  Holding more cash than allowed

  Refusal to show accounts despite repeated request etc.

Example 4: If one of the partners keeps erroneous accounts and omits to enter
receipts or if there is continued quarrels between the partners or there is such
a state of things that destroys the mutual confidence of partners, the court may
order for dissolution of the firm.

(e) Transfer of interest: Where a partner other than the partner suing, has
         transferred the whole of his interest in the firm to a third party or has allowed

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.64       BUSINESS LAWS

         his share to be charged or sold by the court, in the recovery of arrears of land
         revenue due by the partner, the court may dissolve the firm at the instance of
         any other partner.

(f) Continuous/Perpetual losses: Where the business of the firm cannot be
         carried on except at a loss in future also, the court may order for its dissolution.

(g) Just and equitable grounds: Where the court considers any other ground to
         be just and equitable for the dissolution of the firm, it may dissolve a firm. The
         following are the cases for the just and equitable grounds-

         (i) Deadlock in the management.

         (ii) Where the partners are not in talking terms between them.

         (iii) Loss of substratum.

         (iv) Gambling by a partner on a stock exchange.

                                                         Dissolution of Firm

Without the order of the                                       By order of the Court
             Court                                                   (Section 44)

    [Section 40 to 43]

Insanity Misconduct       Permanent                Persistent  Transfer of  Continuous  Just and
                          incapacity               breach of    Interest         loss   equitable
                                                   agreement                             ground

By mutual                 Compulsory               On happening of certain event   By notice
agreement                 dissolution                           (Section 42)      (Section 43)
                          (Section 41)

3.4 CONSEQUENCES                                   OF                       DISSOLUTION

(SECTIONS 45 - 55)

Consequent to the dissolution of a partnership firm, the partners have certain rights and
liabilities, as are discussed:

(a) Liability for acts of partners done after dissolution (Section 45):

         (1) Notwithstanding the dissolution of a firm, the partners continue to be liable as
                   such to third parties for any act done by any of them which would have been

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.65

                   an act of the firm if done before the dissolution, until public notice is given of
                   the dissolution.

                   Provided that the estate of a partner who dies, or who is adjudicated an
                   insolvent, or of a partner who, not having been known to the person dealing
                   with the firm to be a partner, retires from the firm, is not liable under this section
                   for acts done after the date on which he ceases to be a partner.

         (2) Notices under sub-section (1) may be given by any partner.

                   Section 45 has two fold objectives-

                   1. It seeks to protect third parties dealing with the firm who had no notice
                             of prior dissolution and

                   2. It also seeks to protect partners of a dissolved firm from liability
                             towards third parties.

         Example 5: X and Y who carried on business in partnership for several years, executed
         on December 1, a deed dissolving the partnership from the date, but failed to give a
         public notice of the dissolution. On December 20, X borrowed in the firm's name a
         certain sum of money from R, who was ignorant of the dissolution. In such a case, Y
         also would be liable for the amount because no public notice was given.

         However, there are exceptions to the rule stated in above example i.e. even where
         notice of dissolution has not been given, there will be no liability for subsequent acts
         in the case of:

         (a) the estate of a deceased partner,

         (b) an insolvent partner, or

         (c) a dormant partner, i.e., a partner who was not known as a partner to the person
                   dealing with the firm.

(b) Right of partners to have business wound up after dissolution (Section 46): On
         the dissolution of a firm every partner or his representative is entitled, as against all
         the other partners or their representative, to have the property of the firm applied in
         payment of the debts and liabilities of the firm, and to have the surplus distributed
         among the partners or their representatives according to their rights.

(c) Continuing authority of partners for purposes of winding up (Section 47): After
         the dissolution of a firm the authority of each partner to bind the firm, and the other
         mutual rights and obligations of the partners, continue notwithstanding the
         dissolution, so far as may be necessary to wind up the affairs of the firm and to
         complete transactions begun but unfinished at the time of the dissolution, but not
         otherwise:

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.66  BUSINESS LAWS

         Provided that the firm is in no case bound by the acts of a partner who has been
         adjudicated insolvent; but this proviso does not affect the liability of any person who
         has after the adjudication represented himself or knowingly permitted himself to be
         represented as a partner of the insolvent.

(d) Mode of Settlement of partnership accounts (Section 48): In settling the accounts
         of a firm after dissolution, the following rules shall, subject to agreement by the
         partners, be observed:-

         (i) Losses, including deficiencies of capital, shall be paid first out of profits, next
                   out of capital, and, lastly, if necessary, by the partners individually in the
                   proportions in which they were entitled to share profits;

         (ii) The assets of the firm, including any sums contributed by the partners to make
                   up deficiencies of capital, must be applied in the following manner and order:

                   (a) in paying the debts of the firm to third parties;

                   (b) in paying to each partner rateably what is due to him from capital;

                   (c) in paying to each partner rateably what is due to him on account of
                             capital; and

                   (d) the residue, if any, shall be divided among the partners in the
                             proportions in which they were entitled to share profits.

         Example 6: X and Y were partners sharing profits and losses equally and X died. On
         taking partnership accounts, it transpired that he contributed ` 6,60,000 to the capital
         of the firm and Y only `40,000. The assets amounted to ` 2,00,000. In such situation,
         the deficiency (` 6,60,000 + ` 40,000 ­ ` 2,00,000 i.e. ` 5,00,000) would have to be
         shared equally by Y and X's estate.

         If in the above example, the agreement provided that on dissolution the surplus assets
         would be divided between the partners according to their respective interests in the
         capital and on the dissolution of the firm a deficiency of capital was found, then the
         assets would be divided between the partners in proportion to their capital with the
         result that X's estate would be the main loser.

(e) Payment of firm debts and of separate debts (Section 49): Where there are joint
         debts due from the firm and also separate debts due from any partner:

         (i) the property of the firm shall be applied in the first instance in payment of the
                   debts of the firm, and if there is any surplus, then the share of each partner shall
                   be applied to the pay ment of his separate debts or paid to him;

         (ii) the separate property of any partner shall be applied first in the payment of his
                   separate debts and surplus, if any, in the payment of debts of the firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                    4.67

SUMMARY

Registration of a firm is effected by the Registrar of Firms by recording in the Register of
Firms an entry of the statement relating to registration furnished to him. The Act does not
make registration of the firm compulsory, yet the effect of the rules relating to the
consequences of non-registration is such as practically necessitates the registration of the
firm at one time or other. Certain disabilities have been imposed on partners of an
unregistered firm seeking to enforce certain claims in the Civil Courts. A firm which is not
registered is not able to enforce its claim against third parties in the Civil Courts; and any
partner who is not registered is not able to enforce his claim either against third parties or
against the fellow partners. An unregistered partner may, however, sue for the dissolution of
the firm or for accounts only if the firm is already dissolved.

Dissolution of a firm means the breaking up or extinction of the relationship which subsisted
between all the partners of the firm under various circumstances contemplated by Act. A
partnership can be dissolved only in accordance with the manner prescribed under the Act.

                               REGISTRATION OF FIRMS: SEC. 58 & 59

Meaning: Getting             Effects of Non-             Rights not affected by non-
registered with the             registration                  registration (Sec. 69)
Registrar of Firm.
                                  (Sec. 69)         1. Right of third parties to sue the firm
Procedure: Application in                           or any partner.
prescribed form with         1. No suit in a civil
prescribed fees.             court by a             2. Power of an Official Assignee or
                             partner against        Receiver or the Court.
Contents of Application      the firm or other
Form:                        co-partners.           3. Right of the partners to sue for the
                                                    dissolution of the firm or for the
Name of the firm.            2. No suit in a civil  accounts of a dissolved firm or for
Principal & other places of  court by the firm      the realization of the property of a
                             against third          dissolved firm.
  business of the firm.      parties
Date when each partner                              4. Rights of the firm or partners of firm
                             3. The firm or its     having no place of business in India.
  joined the firm.           partners cannot
Names & addresses of the     make a claim of        5. Right to sue or claim a set-off if the
                             set-off or other       value of the suit upto Rs. 100.
  partners.                  proceeding
The duration of the firm.    based upon a           6. Rights of partners to sue for the
Note: Registration of firm   contract               criminal proceedings against the
becomes effective from date                         other partners of the firm and against
                                                    the third parties.
of filing the form.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            4.68             BUSINESS LAWS

                                  DISSOLUTION: SEC. 39 ­ 44

            Discontinuance of the jural relation between all the partners of the firm.

                                    MODE OF DISSOLUTION

By Mutual        By          By Happening           By Notice            By a Decree of
Agreement   Operation           of certain               of                 the Court
                                                                             (Sec. 44)
 (Sec. 40)    of law         contingencies         Dissolution
             (Sec. 41)          (Sec. 42)           (Sec. 43)        A partner becoming of
                                                                      unsound mind.
 With        All but one           Unless           Partnership
the           of the                                 at will.        Permanent incapacity of
consent       partners are       otherwise                            a partner.
of all the    adjudicated                           Notice once
partners      as insolvent.       agreed,            given           Misconduct of a partner
                              On the expiry          cannot be        affecting the business.
    Or       By the                                  withdrawn
 As per       happening        of fixed term         without         Wilful and persistent
contract      of an event     On                     consent of       breach of partnership
between       which makes                            all partners.    agreement by a partner
the           partnership      completion of
partners      unlawful.        purpose                               Transfer of whole interest
                              On the death                            or share by a partner.
                               of a partner;
                              On the                                 Improbability of business
                               insolvency of                          being carried on at loss.
                               a partner.
                                                                     Just and Equitable.

                                 Consequences of Dissolution

            Continuing liability until public notice.
            Rights to enforce winding up.
            Extent of continuing authority of the partners after

              dissolution.
            Settlement of partnership accounts.
            Personal profits earned after dissolution must be

              accounted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.69

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Registration of a firm is:
         (a) Compulsory
         (b) Optional
         (c) Occasional
         (d) None of the above

2. An unregistered firm cannot claim:
         (a) Set on
         (b) Set off
         (c) Set on and set off
         (d) None of the above

3. As per the accepted view, the registration of the firm is considered complete when
         (a) Complete application for registration is filed with the Registrar.
         (b) Registrar files the statement and makes entries in the Register of Firms.
         (c) Registrar gives notice of registration to all partners.
         (d) Court records the statement and certifies the entries in Register of Firms.

4. A partnership firm is compulsorily dissolved where
         (a) All partners have become insolvent
         (b) Firm's business has become unlawful
         (c) The fixed term has expired
         (d) In cases (a) and (b) only

5. On which of the following grounds, a partner may apply to the court for dissolution of
         the firm?
         (a) Insanity of a partner
         (b) Misconduct of a partner
         (c) Perpetual losses in business
         (d) All of the above

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.70  BUSINESS LAWS

6. Which of the following do not constitute a ground for dissolution by Court?
         (a) Misconduct by partner
         (b) Transfer of interest by partner
         (c) Just and equitable grounds
         (d) Insolvency of a partner

7. Upon dissolution of firm, losses, including deficiencies of capital, shall be paid first-
         (a) Out of Profits
         (b) Out of Capital
         (c) By the partners in their profit sharing ratio
         (d) By the partners equally

8. Public notice in case of a firm is not required in case of:
         (a) Admission of a partner
         (b) Retirement of a partner
         (c) Expulsion of a partner
         (d) Dissolution of the firm.

9. Which of the following do not constitute ground for dissolution by Court?
         (a) Insanity of the partner
         (b) Business carried on at a loss
         (c) Wilful misconduct of a partner
         (d) Expulsion of a partner

10. Dissolution of partnership between all the partners of a firm is called-
         (a) Dissolution of partnership
         (b) Dissolution of partners
         (c) Dissolution of the firm
         (d) Reconstitution of firm

11. A partnership firm has to be registered with:
         (a) Director of firms
         (b) Registrar of firms

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.71

         (c) Registrar of companies
         (d) Competent Court
12. In settling the account after dissolution, the firm's assets shall be first applied in-
         (a) Losses including deficiencies of capital.
         (b) Payment of partner's loan.
         (c) Payment of partner's goodwill share.
         (d) Distribution to partners in their profit sharing ratio.
13. X, Y and Z are partners in a firm. Due to differences amongst the partners, there is
         deadlock in the management. X applies to the court for the dissolution of the firm. Will
         he succeed?
         (a) Yes, on just and equitable ground
         (b) No, because it is not a valid ground for dissolution
         (c) No, it will require consent of all the partners
         (d) Yes, if the Registrar of Firm agrees.
14. A firm is compulsorily dissolved on the:
         (a) Death of a partner
         (b) Adjudication of a partner as an insolvent
         (c) Expiry of a fixed period for which the firm was constituted
         (d) Business of the firm becoming illegal due to happening of an event.
15. The partnership deed does not include:
         (a) The nature of the business of the firm.
         (b) The duration of the firm.
         (c) The date when each partner joined the firm.
         (d) The date when each partner exit the firm.
16. Mr. A, partner of ABC Associates give notice in writing to all other partners i.e. Mr. B and
         Mr. C of his intention to dissolve the firm on 01.09.2020. Such notice was dated
         30.08.2020. In the given case, the firm stands dissolved with effect from______________.
         (a) 30.08.2020.
         (b) 01.09.2020.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         4.72        BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) Neither 30.08.2020 nor 01.09.2020 but as per the date mentioned in partnership
                   deed as last date of existence of the firm.

         (d) Either 30.08.2020 or 01.09.2020 as mutually agreed by all three partners.
17. A firm may be dissolved with the consent of all the partners or in accordance with a

         contract between the partners. Such dissolution is known as ________________.
         (a) Dissolution by contract.
         (b) Dissolution by agreement.
         (c) Dissolution by will.
         (d) Dissolution of Partnership.
18. The statement for the purpose of registration under Section 58(1) of Indian Partnership
         Act, 1932 can be signed by:
         (a) Any one partner of the Firm
         (b) Legal heirs of all partners of the Firm
         (c) All the partners or by their agents specially authorised in this behalf
         (d) Agents of all partners of the Firm.

Descriptive Questions

1. What is the procedure of registration of a partnership firm under the Indian Partnership
         Act, 1932?

2. When does dissolution of a partnership firm take place under the provisions of the Indian
         Partnership Act, 1932? Explain.

3. "Indian Partnership Act does not make the registration of firms compulsory nor does it
         impose any penalty for non-registration." In light of the given statement, discuss the
         consequences of non-registration of the partnership firms In India?

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answer to MCQs

1.  (b)  2.     (b)  3.                            (b)  4.  (d)  5.  (d)  6.  (d)

7.  (a)  8.     (a)  9.                            (d) 10. (c) 11. (b) 12. (a)

13. (a) 14. (d) 15. (d) 16. (b) 17. (b) 18. (c)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.73

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION (SECTION 58):

         (1) The registration of a firm may be effected at any time by sending by post or
                   delivering to the Registrar of the area in which any place of business of the firm
                   is situated or proposed to be situated, a statement in the prescribed form and
                   accompanied by the prescribed fee, stating-

                   (a) The firm's name

                   (b) The place or principal place of business of the firm,

                   (c) The names of any other places where the firm carries on business,

                   (d) the date when each partner joined the firm,

                   (e) the names in full and permanent addresses of the partners, and

                   (f) the duration of the firm.

                   The statement shall be signed by all the partners, or by their agents specially
                   authorised in this behalf.

         (2) Each person signing the statement shall also verify it in the manner prescribed.

         (3) A firm name shall not contain any of the following words, namely:-

                   `Crown', Emperor', `Empress', `Empire', `Imperial', `King', `Queen', `Royal', or
                   words expressing or implying the sanction, approval or patronage of
                   Government except when the State Government signifies its consent to the use
                   of such words as part of the firm-name by order in writing.

2. Dissolution of Firm: The Dissolution of Firm means the discontinuation of the jural
         relation existing between all the partners of the Firm. But when only one of the partners
         retires or becomes in capacitated from acting as a partner due to death, insolvency or
         insanity, the partnership, i.e., the relationship between such a partner and other is
         dissolved, but the rest may decide to continue. In such cases, there is in practice, no
         dissolution of the firm. The particular partner goes out, but the remaining partners
         carry on the business of the Firm. In the case of dissolution of the firm, on the other
         hand, the whole firm is dissolved. The partnership terminates as between each and
         every partner of the firm.

         Dissolution of a Firm may take place (Section 39 - 44)

         (a) as a result of any agreement between all the partners (i.e., dissolution by
                   agreement);

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.74  BUSINESS LAWS

         (b) by the adjudication of all the partners, or of all the partners but one, as insolvent
                   (i.e., compulsory dissolution);

         (c) by the business of the firm becoming unlawful (i.e., compulsory dissolution);

         (d) subject to agreement between the parties, on the happening of certain
                   contingencies, such as: (i) effluence of time; (ii) completion of the venture for
                   which it was entered into; (iii) death of a partner; (iv) insolvency of a partner.

         (e) by a partner giving notice of his intention to dissolve the firm, in case of
                   partnership at will and the firm being dissolved as from the date mentioned in
                   the notice, or if no date is mentioned, as from the date of the communication
                   of the notice; and

         (f) by intervention of court in case of: (i) a partner becoming the unsound mind;
                   (ii) permanent incapacity of a partner to perform his duties as such; (iii)
                   Misconduct of a partner affecting the business; (iv) wilful or persistent breach
                   of agreement by a partner; (v) transfer or sale of the whole interest of a partner;
                   (vi) improbability of the business being carried on save at a loss; (vii) the court
                   being satisfied on other equitable grounds that the firm should be dissolved.

3. It is true to say that Indian Partnership Act, 1932 does not make the registration of
         firms compulsory nor does it impose any penalty for non-registration.

         Following are consequences of Non-registration of Partnership Firms in India:

         The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 does not make the registration of firms compulsory
         nor does it impose any penalty for non-registration. However, under Section 69, non-
         registration of partnership gives rise to a number of disabilities which we shall
         presently discuss. Although registration of firms is not compulsory, yet the
         consequences or disabilities of non-registration have a persuasive pressure for their
         registration. These disabilities briefly are as follows:

         (i) No suit in a civil court by firm or other co-partners against third party: The
                   firm or any other person on its behalf cannot bring an action against the third
                   party for breach of contract entered into by the firm, unless the firm is
                   registered and the persons suing are or have been shown in the register of firms
                   as partners in the firm. In other words, a registered firm can only file a suit
                   against a third party and the persons suing have been in the register of firms
                   as partners in the firm

         (ii) No relief to partners for set-off of claim: If an action is brought against the
                   firm by a third party, then neither the firm nor the partner can claim any set-

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.75

         off, if the suit be valued for more than ` 100 or pursue other proceedings to
         enforce the rights arising from any contract.

(iii) Aggrieved partner cannot bring legal action against other partner or the
         firm: A partner of an unregistered firm (or any other person on his behalf) is
         precluded from bringing legal action against the firm or any person alleged to
         be or to have been a partner in the firm. But, such a person may sue for
         dissolution of the firm or for accounts and realization of his share in the firm's
         property where the firm is dissolved.

(iv) Third party can sue the firm: In case of an unregistered firm, an action can be
         brought against the firm by a third party.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
