CHAPTER                  4

THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP
ACT, 1932

UNIT -1: GENERAL NATURE OF PARTNERSHIP

                                              LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to understand-
 The concept of partnerships and be clear about its essentials.
 The `principal - agent relationship' among the partners.
 Points of difference between partnership and other various forms of

       organization.
 Types of Partners

UNIT OVERVIEW

                                         General Nature of Partnership

  What is                                                    Distinction with  Type of
Partnership                                                  other forms of    Partners
                                                               organisation

Essential  True test of       Vs.                  Vs. Club  Vs. HUF             Vs. Co-       Vs.
elements   partnership   Joint Stock                                           ownership  Association
                         Company

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.2                       BUSINESS LAWS

    1.1 DEFINITION OF `PARTNERSHIP', `PARTNER',

             `FIRM' AND `FIRM NAME' (SECTION 4)

`Partnership' is the relation between persons who have agreed to
share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of them
acting for all.

Persons who have entered into partnership with one another are
called individually `partners' and collectively `a firm', and the
name under which their business is carried on is called the `firm
name'.

1.2 ELEMENTS OF PARTNERSHIP

The definition of the partnership contains the following five elements which must co-exist
before a partnership can come into existence.

   Partnership is an      The partnership must be   Partnership is organised
association of two or     a result of an agreement       to carry on some
                                                               business
    more persons.             entered into by all
                             persons concerned.

The agreement must be      The business must be
 to share the profits of  carried on by all or any
                          of them acting for all.
       the business.

We shall now discuss the aforestated elements one by one.

1. ASSOCIATION OF TWO OR MORE PERSONS: Partnership is an association of 2 or
         more persons. Again, only persons recognized by law can enter into an agreement of
         partnership. Therefore, a firm, since it is not a person recognized in the eyes of law
         cannot be a partner. Again, a minor cannot be a partner in a firm, but with the consent
         of all the partners, may be admitted to the benefits of partnership.

         The partnership Act is silent about the maximum number of partners but section 464
         of the Companies Act, 2013 has now put a limit of 50 partners in any
         association/partnership firm.

2. AGREEMENT: It may be observed that partnership must be the result of an agreement
         between two or more persons. There must be an agreement entered into by all the

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.3

         persons concerned. This element relates to voluntary contractual nature of partnership.
         Thus, the nature of the partnership is voluntary and contractual.

         An agreement from which relationship of Partnership arises may be express. It may
         also be implied from the act done by partners and from a consistent course of conduct
         being followed, showing mutual understanding between them. It may be oral or in
         writing.

3. BUSINESS: In this context, we will consider two propositions. First, there must exist a
         business. For the purpose, the term `business' includes every trade, occupation and
         profession. The existence of business is essential. Secondly, the motive of the business
         is the "acquisition of gains" which leads to the formation of partnership. Therefore,
         there can be no partnership where there is no intention to carry on the business and
         to share the profit thereof.

Existence of
  business Acquisition of
                          gains

4. AGREEMENT TO SHARE PROFITS: The sharing of profits is an
         essential feature of partnership. There can be no partnership
         where only one of the partners is entitled to the whole of the
         profits of the business. Partners must agree to share the profits
         in any manner they choose.

         But an agreement to share losses is not an essential element. It is open to one or more
         partners to agree to share all the losses. However, in the event of losses, unless agreed
         otherwise, these must be borne in the profit-sharing ratio.

         Example 1: Co-owners who share amongst themselves the rent derived from a piece
         of land are not partners, because there does not exist any business.

         Example 2: No charitable institution or club may be floated in partnership [A joint
         stock company may, however, be floated for non-economic purposes].

         Example 3: X and Y buy certain bales of cotton which they agree to sell on their joint
         account and to share the profits equally. In these circumstances, X and Y are partners
         in respect of such cotton business.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    4.4  BUSINESS LAWS

5. BUSINESS CARRIED ON BY ALL OR ANY OF THEM ACTING FOR ALL: The business
         must be carried on by all the partners or by anyone or more of the partners acting for
         all. This is the cardinal principle of the partnership Law. In other words, there should
         be a binding contract of mutual agency between the partners.

         An act of one partner in the course of the business of the firm is in fact an act of all
         partners. Each partner carrying on the business is the principal as well as the agent for
         all the other partners. He is an agent in so far as he can bind the other partners by his
         acts and he is a principal to the extent that he is bound by the act of other partners.

         It may be noted that the true test of partnership is mutual agency rather than sharing
         of profits. If the element of mutual agency is absent, then there will be no partnership.

         Example 4: A, B and C are partners in ABC Associates, a partnership firm. If A made
         certain purchases for the purpose of business from Mr. K, then Mr. K can recover the
         money from A, B or C as all partners are liable for any act done on behalf of firm.

         In KD Kamath & Co.

         The Supreme Court has held that the two essential conditions to be satisfied are that:

         (1) there should be an agreement to share the profits as well as the losses of
                   business; and

         (2) the business must be carried on by all or any of them acting for all, within the
                   meaning of the definition of `partnership' under section 4.

         The fact that the exclusive power and control, by agreement of the parties, is vested in
         one partner or the further circumstance that only one partner can operate the bank
         accounts or borrow on behalf of the firm are not destructive of the theory of
         partnership provided the two essential conditions, mentioned earlier, are satisfied.

         Note:- The `Partnership Agreement' is also known as `Partnership Deed'.

    1.3 TRUE TEST OF PARTNERSHIP

Mode of determining existence of partnership (Section 6): In determining whether a group
of persons is or is not a firm, or whether a person is or not a partner in a firm, regard shall be
had to the real relation between the parties, as shown by all relevant facts taken together.

For determining the existence of partnership, it must be proved.

1.  There was an agreement between all the persons concerned;

2.  The agreement was to share the profits of a business and

3.  the business was carried on by all or any of them acting for all.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.5

1. Agreement: Partnership is created by agreement and not by status (Section 5). The
         relation of partnership arises from contract and not from status; and in particular, the
         members of a Hindu Undivided family carrying on a family business as such, or a
         Burmese Buddhist husband and wife carrying on business as such are not partners in
         such business.

2. Sharing of Profit: The sharing of profits or of gross returns arising from property by
         persons holding a joint or common interest in that property does not of itself make
         such persons partners.

         The receipt by a person of a share of the profits of a business, or of a payment
         contingent upon the earning of profits or varying with the profits earned by a business,
         does not of itself make him a partner with the persons carrying on the business; and
         in particular, the receipt of such share or payment-

         (a) by a lender of money to persons engaged or about to engage in any business,

         (b) by a servant or agent as remuneration,

         (c) by a widow or child of a deceased partner, as annuity, or

         (d) by a previous owner or part owner of the business, as consideration for the sale
                   of the goodwill or share thereof, does not of itself make the receiver a partner
                   with the persons carrying on the business.

         As discussed earlier, sharing of profit is an essential element to constitute a
         partnership. But, it is only a prima facie evidence and not conclusive evidence, in that
         regard. The sharing of profits or of gross returns accruing from property by persons
         holding joint or common interest in the property would not by itself make such persons
         partners. Although the right to participate in profits is a strong test of partnership, and
         there may be cases where, upon a simple participation in profits, there is a partnership,
         yet whether the relation does or does not exist must depend upon the whole contract
         between the parties.

         Where there is an express agreement between partners to share the profit of a business
         and the business is being carried on by all or any of them acting for all, there will be
         no difficulty in the light of provisions of Section 4, in determining the existence or
         otherwise of partnership.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.6  BUSINESS LAWS

         But the task becomes difficult when either there is no specific agreement or the
         agreement is such as does not specifically speak of partnership. In such a case for
         testing the existence or otherwise of partnership relation, Section 6 has to be
         referred.

         According to Section 6, regard must be had to the real relation between the parties as
         shown by all relevant facts taken together. The rule is easily stated and is clear but its
         application is difficult. Cumulative effect of all relevant facts such as written or verbal
         agreement, real intention and conduct of the parties, other surrounding circumstances
         etc., are to be considered while deciding the relationship between the parties and
         ascertaining the existence of partnership.

3. Agency: Existence of Mutual Agency which is the cardinal principle of partnership law,
         is very much helpful in reaching a conclusion in this regard. Each partner carrying on
         the business is the principal as well as an agent of other partners. So, the act of one
         partner done on behalf of firm, binds all the partners. If the elements of mutual agency
         relationship exist between the parties constituting a group formed with a view to earn
         profits by running a business, a partnership may be deemed to exist.

         Existence of Mutual Agency which is the cardinal principle of partnership law, is very
         much helpful in reaching a conclusion in this regard. Each partner carrying on the
         business is the principal as well as an agent of other partners. So, the act of one partner
         done on behalf of firm, binds all the partners. If the elements of mutual agency
         relationship exist between the parties constituting a group formed with a view to earn
         profits by running a business, a partnership may be deemed to exist.

         Santiranjan Das Gupta Vs. Dasyran Murzamull (Supreme Court)

         In Santiranjan Das Gupta Vs. Dasyran Murzamull, following factors weighed upon the
         Supreme Court to reach the conclusion that there is no partnership between the
         parties:

         (a) Parties have not retained any record of terms and conditions of partnership.

         (b) Partnership business has maintained no accounts of its own, which would be
                   open to inspection by both parties.

         (c) No account of the partnership was opened with any bank.

         (d) No written intimation was conveyed to the Deputy Director of Procurement
                   with respect to the newly created partnership.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                            4.7

1.4 PARTNERSHIP DISTINGUISHED FROM OTHER
         FORMS OF ORGANISATION

Partnership Vs. Joint Stock Company

Basis            Partnership                                Joint Stock Company
Legal status
Agency           A firm is not legal entity i.e. it has no  A company is a separate legal entity
Distribution of  legal personality distinct from the        distinct from its members (Salomon
profits          personalities of its constituent           v. Salomon).
                 members.
Extent of
liability        In a firm, every partner is an agent       In a company, a member is not an
                 of the other partners as well as of        agent of the other members or of
Property         the firm.                                  the company, his actions do not
                                                            bind either.
Transfer of
shares           The profits of the firm must be            There is no such compulsion to
                 distributed among the partners             distribute its profits among its
                 according to the terms of the              members. Some portion of the
                 partnership deed.                          profits, but generally not the entire
                                                            profit, become distributable among
                                                            the shareholders only when
                                                            dividends are declared.

                 In a partnership, the liability of the     In a company limited by shares, the
                 partners is unlimited. This means          liability of a shareholder is limited to
                 that each partner is liable for debts      the amount, if any, unpaid on his
                 of a firm incurred in the course of        shares, but in the case of a
                 the business of the firm and these         guarantee company, the liability is
                 debts can be recovered from his            limited to the amount for which he
                 private property, if the joint estate is   has agreed to be liable. However,
                 insufficient to meet them wholly.          there may be companies where the
                                                            liability of members is unlimited.

                 The firm's property is that which is       In a company, its property is
                 the "joint estate" of all the partners     separate from that of its members
                 as distinguished from the `separate'       who can receive it back only in the
                 estate of any of them and it does          form of dividends or refund of
                 not belong to a body distinct in law       capital.
                 from its members.

                 A share in a partnership cannot be In a company a shareholder may

                 transferred without the consent of transfer his shares, subject to the

                 all the partners.                          provisions contained in its Articles.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.8           BUSINESS LAWS

                                                      In the case of public limited
                                                      companies whose shares are
                                                      quoted on the stock exchange, the
                                                      transfer is usually unrestricted.

Management    In the absence of an express            Members of a company are not
              agreement to the contrary, all the      entitled to take part in the
Registration  partners are entitled to participate    management unless they are
Winding up    in the management.                      appointed as directors, in which
Number of                                             case they may participate.
membership                                            Members, however, enjoy the right
                                                      of attending general meeting and
Duration of                                           voting where they can decide
existence                                             certain questions such as election of
                                                      directors, appointment of auditors,
                                                      etc.

              Registration is not compulsory in A company cannot come into

              the case of partnership.                existence unless it is registered

                                                      under the Companies Act, 2013.

              A partnership firm can be dissolved     A company, being a legal person is
              at any time if all the partners agree.  either wind up by the National
                                                      Company Law Tribunal or its name
                                                      is struck of by the Registrar of
                                                      Companies.

              According to section 464 of the         A private company may have as
              Companies Act, 2013, the number         many as 200 members but not less
              of partners in any association shall    than two and a public company may
              not exceed 100.                         have any number of members but
                                                      not less than seven. A private
              However, the Rule given under the       Company can also be formed by
              Companies (Miscellaneous) Rules,        one person known as one person
              2014 restrict the present limit to 50.  Company.

              Unless there is a contract to the A company enjoys a perpetual
              contrary, death, retirement or succession.
              insolvency of a partner results in the
              dissolution of the firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                    4.9

Partnership Vs. Club

Basis            of Partnership                             Club
Difference

Definition            It is an association of persons       A club is an association of persons
                      formed for earning profits from a     formed with the object not of
                      business carried on by all or any     earning profit, but of promoting
                      one of them acting for all.           some beneficial purposes such as
                                                            improvement of health or
                                                            providing recreation for the
                                                            members, etc.

Relationship          Persons forming a partnership are     Persons forming a club are called
                      called partners and a partner is an   members. A member of a club is
                      agent for other partners.             not the agent of other members.

Interest in the       Partner has interest in the property A member of a club has no interest
property
                      of the firm.                          in the property of the club.

Dissolution           A change in the partners of the firm A change in the membership of a

                      affect its existence.                 club does not affect its existence.

Partnership vs. Hindu Undivided Family

Basis of difference Partnership                             Joint Hindu family

Mode of creation      Partnership is created necessarily The right in the joint family is

                      by an agreement.                      created by status means its

                                                            creation by birth in the family.

Death of a member     Death of a partner ordinarily         The death of a member in the
                      leads to the dissolution of           Hindu undivided family does not
                      partnership.                          give rise to dissolution of the family
                                                            business.

Management            All the partners are         equally  The right of management of joint
                      entitled to take part        in the   family business generally vests in
                      partnership business.
                                                            the Karta, the governing male

                                                            member or female member of the
                                                            family.1

1 Joint Hindu Family: The amendment in the Hindu Succession Act, 2005, entitled all adult members
­ Hindu males and females to become coparceners in a HUF. They now enjoy equal rights of

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            4.10   BUSINESS LAWS

Authority to bind  Every partner can, by his act, bind   The Karta or the manager, has the
                   the firm.                             authority to contract for the family
                                                         business and the other members in
                                                         the family.

Liability          In a partnership, the liability of a  In a Hindu undivided family, only
                   partner is unlimited.                 the liability of the Karta is
                                                         unlimited, and the other
                                                         coparcener are liable only to the
                                                         extent of their share in the profits
                                                         of the family business.

Calling        for A partner can bring a suit against On the separation of the joint
accounts
closure           on the firm for accounts, provided family, a member is not entitled to

                   he also seeks the dissolution of ask for account of the family

                   the firm.                             business.

Governing Law      A partnership is governed by the A Joint Hindu Family business is

                   Indian Partnership Act, 1932.         governed by the Hindu Law.

Minor's capacity   In a partnership, a minor cannot      In Hindu undivided family business,
                   become a partner, though he can       a minor becomes a member of the
                   be admitted to the benefits of        ancestral business by the incidence
                   partnership, only with the            of birth. He does not have to wait
                   consent of all the partners.          for attaining majority.

Continuity         A firm subject to a contract          A Joint Hindu family has the
                   between the partners gets             continuity till it is divided. The
                   dissolved by death or insolvency      status of Joint Hindu family is not
                   of a partner.                         thereby affected by the death of a
                                                         member.

Number            of In case of Partnership number of Members of HUF who carry on a
Members                members should not exceed 50. business may be unlimited in
                                                                      number.

Share in       the In a partnership, each partner has In a HUF, no coparceners has a
business              a defined share by virtue of an definite share. His interest is a
                      agreement between the partners. fluctuating one. It is capable of
                                                                     being enlarged by deaths in the
                                                                     family diminished by births in the
                                                                     family.

inheritance due to this amendment. On 1st February 2016, Justice Najmi Waziri gave a landmark
judgement which allowed the eldest female coparceners of an HUF to become its Karta.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                     4.11

Partnership Vs. Co-Ownership or joint ownership i.e. the relation which subsists between
persons who own property jointly or in common.

Basis           of Partnership                      Co-ownership
difference

Formation       Partnership always arises out of a  Co-ownership may arise either
                contract, express or implied.       from agreement or by the
                                                    operation of law, such as by
                                                    inheritance.

Implied agency  A partner is the agent of the other A co-owner is not the agent of

                partners.                           other co-owners.

Nature          of There is community of interest Co-ownership does not necessarily
interest
                which means that profits and involve sharing of profits and

                losses must have to be shared.      losses.

Transfer        of A share in the partnership is A co - owner may transfer his
interest
                transferred only by the consent of interest or rights in the property

                other partners.                     without the consent of other co-

                                                    owners.

Partnership vs. Association

Basis       of Partnership                          Association
difference
Meaning         Partnership means and involves      Association evolves out of social
                setting up relation of agency       cause and there is no necessarily
Examples        between two or more persons who     motive to earn and share profits.
                have entered into a business for    The intention is not to enter in a
                gains, with the intention to share  business for gains.
                the profits of such a business.

                Partnership to run a business and   Members of charitable society or
                earn profit thereon.                religious association or an
                                                    improvement scheme or building
                                                    corporation or a mutual insurance
                                                    society or a trade protection
                                                    association.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    4.12        BUSINESS LAWS

    1.5 KINDS OF PARTNERSHIPS

The following chart illustrates the various kinds of partnership:

                                                Kind of Partnership

    With regard to duration                            With regard to the extent of
                                                                 the business

Partnership at  Partnership for a                   Particular         General
       will        fixed period                    partnership       partnership

The various kinds of partnership are discussed below:

1. Partnership at will according to Section 7 of the Act, partnership at will is a
         partnership when:

1.  no fixed period has been agreed upon for the duration of the partnership; and

2.  there is no provision made as to the determination of the partnership.

These two conditions must be satisfied before a partnership can be regarded as a
partnership at will. But, where there is an agreement between the partners either for
the duration of the partnership or for the determination of the partnership, the
partnership is not partnership at will.

Where a partnership entered into for a fixed term is continued after the expiry of such
term, it is to be treated as having become a partnership at will.

A partnership at will may be dissolved by any partner by giving notice in writing to all
the other partners of his intention to dissolve the same.

2. Partnership for a fixed period: Where a provision is made by a contract for the
         duration of the partnership, the partnership is called `partnership for a fixed period'. It
         is a partnership created for a particular period of time. Such a partnership comes to
         an end on the expiry of the fixed period.

3. Particular partnership: A partnership may be organized for the prosecution of a single
         adventure as well as for the conduct of a continuous business. Where a person

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                      4.13

    becomes a partner with another person in any particular adventure or undertaking the
    partnership is called `particular partnership'.

    A partnership, constituted for a single adventure or undertaking is, subject to any
    agreement, dissolved by the completion of the adventure or undertaking.

4. General partnership: Where a partnership is constituted with respect to the business in
         general, it is called a general partnership. A general partnership is different from a
         particular partnership. In the case of a particular partnership, the liability of the partners
         extends only to that particular adventure or undertaking, but it is not so in the case of
         general partnership. General partnership is different from limited liability partnership.

Partnership Deed

Partnership is the result of an agreement. No particular formalities are required for an
agreement of partnership. It may be in writing or formed verbally. But it is desirable to have
the partnership agreement in writing to avoid future disputes. The document in writing
containing the various terms and conditions as to the relationship of the partners to each
other is called the `partnership deed'. It should be drafted with care and be stamped
according to the provisions of the Stamp Act, 1899. Where the partnership comprises
immovable property, the instrument of partnership must be in writing, stamped and registered
under the Registration Act.

Partnership deed may contain the following information:-

1.  Name of the partnership firm.

2.  Names of all the partners.

3.  Nature and place of the business of the firm.

4.  Date of commencement of partnership.

5.  Duration of the partnership firm.

6.  Capital contribution of each partner.

7.  Profit Sharing ratio of the partners.

8.  Admission and Retirement of a partner.

9.  Rates of interest on Capital, Drawings and loans.

10. Provisions for settlement of accounts in the case of dissolution of the firm.

11. Provisions for Salaries or commissions, payable to the partners, if any.

12. Provisions for expulsion of a partner in case of gross breach of duty or fraud.

A partnership firm may add or delete any provision according to the needs of the firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            4.14            BUSINESS LAWS

    1.6 TYPES OF PARTNERS

Based on the extent of liability, the different classes of partners are:

                                                   Types of Partners

 Active or  Nominal          Sub-                  Outgoing  Sleeping   Partner    Incoming     Partner by
Ostensible                  partner                 Partner      or    in Profits   Partner      Holding

                                                             Dormant     only                       out

Active or Actual or Ostensible partner:

            It is a person                          Who has become a partner by
                                                              agreement, and

                                                   Who actively participates in the
                                                      conduct of the partnership

He acts as an agent of other partners for all acts done in the ordinary course of business. In
the event of his retirement, he must give a public notice in order to absolve himself of liabilities
for acts of other partners done after his retirement.

Sleeping or Dormant Partner:

            It is a person                                   Who is a partner by agreement,
                                                                                and

                                                              Who does not actively take part
                                                             in the conduct of the partnership

                                                                              business

They are called as `sleeping' or `dormant' partners. They share profits and losses and are liable
to the third parties for all acts of the firm. They are, however not required to give public notice
of their retirement from the firm.

Nominal Partner: A person who lends his name to the firm, without having any real interest
in it, is called a nominal partner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                                             4.15

He is not entitled to share the profits of the firm. Neither he invests in the firm nor takes part
in the conduct of the business. He is, however liable to third parties for all acts of the firm.

Lend his name to the                               Without having any     Not entitled to share
           firm                                    real interest in firm        the profits

                       Does not take part in       Liable to third parties
                        the conduct of the         for all acts of the firm
                               business

Partner in profits only: A partner who is entitled to share the profits only without being liable
for the losses is known as the partner for profits only and also liable to the third parties for all
acts of the profits only.

Entitled to share the  Not liable for the losses                          Liable to the third parties
     profits only                                                         for all acts of the profits

                                                                                       only

Incoming partners: A person who is admitted as a partner into an already existing firm with
the consent of all the existing partners is called as "incoming partner". Such a partner is not
liable for any act of the firm done before his admission as a partner.

Example 5: Mr. A joined as a partner on 10th September, 2021 in a firm MNQ Associates which
was existing from 10th July, 2017. Mr. A will not be liable for any acts of the firm done before
his date of joining i.e. 10th September, 2021

Outgoing partner: A partner who leaves a firm in which the rest of the partners continue to
carry on business is called a retiring or outgoing partner. Such a partner remains liable to third
parties for all acts of the firm until public notice is given of his retirement.

Partner by holding out (Section 28): Partnership by holding out is also known as partnership
by estoppel. Where a man holds himself out as a partner, or allows others to do it, he is then
stopped from denying the character he has assumed and upon the faith of which creditors
may be presumed to have acted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.16                     BUSINESS LAWS

When a person represent  Knowingly permits          to be represented as a
         himself, or            himself,           partner in a firm (when in

                                                          fact he is not)

he is liable, like a partner                        to anyone who on the
         in the firm                                       faith of such

                                                   representation has given
                                                       credit to the firm.

A person may himself, by his words or conduct have induced others to believe that he is a
partner or he may have allowed others to represent him as a partner. The result in both the
cases is identical.

Example 6: X and Y are partners in a partnership firm. X introduced A, a manager, as his
partner to Z. A remained silent. Z, a trader believing A as partner supplied 100 T.V sets to the
firm on credit. After expiry of credit period, Z did not get amount of T.V sets sold to the
partnership firm. Z filed a suit against X and A for the recovery of price. Here, in the given
case, A, the Manager is also liable for the price because he becomes a partner by holding out
(Section 28, Indian Partnership Act, 1932).

It is only the person to whom the representation has been made and who has acted thereon
that has right to enforce liability arising out of `holding out'.

You must also note that for the purpose of fixing liability on a person who has, by
representation, led another to act, it is not necessary to show that he was actuated by a
fraudulent intention.

The rule given in Section 28 is also applicable to a former partner who has retired from the
firm without giving proper public notice of his retirement. In such cases a person who, even
subsequent to the retirement, give credit to the firm on the belief that he was a partner, will
be entitled to hold him liable.

Example 7: A partnership firm consisting of P, Q, R and S. S retires from the firm without
giving public notice and his name continues to be used on letterheads. Here, S is liable as a
partner by holding out to creditors who have lent on the faith of his being a partner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                                4.17

SUMMARY

It is not quite easy to define the term `Partnership'. The definition given by Section 4 of the
Act brings out very clearly the fundamental principle that each partner, when carrying on the
business of the firm, is an agent as well as principal, and is probably the most business like
definition of the term. The definition contains three elements which must be present before a
group of persons can be held to be partners, namely; (a) agreement among all the partners;
(b) agreement to share the profits of the business; (c) the business must be carried on by all
or any of them, acting for all. These three elements may appear to overlap, but they are
nevertheless distinct.

The element of agreement in partnership distinguishes it from various other relations which
arise by operation of law and not from agreement, such as, joint-owners, Hindu Undivided
Family, etc.

                                GENERAL NATURE OF PARTNERSHIP

 Definition: Sec. 4                    Essentials of Partnership          Test of Partnership: Sec. 6

"The relationship           1. An association of two or more persons;     A group of persons
between persons             2. An agreement between two or more           constitute a firm if the real
who have agreed to          persons;                                      relation between the parties
share the profits of a      3. Agreement to carry on some business;       as shown by all relevant
business carried on         4. Agreement to share profits of business;    facts taken together
by all, or any of them      5. Business must be carried on by all or any  showing that all essential
acting for all."            of them acting for all.                       elements of partnership are
                                                                          present.
                                       Kinds of Partnership Firms

           With regard to duration                 With regard to Extent of Business

Partnership at will         Partnership for fixed  Particular Partnership              General
                                                                                     Partnership
· No provision is made for  period                 · Partnership is formed for a

duration of partnership. · Partnership created for a particular period or for a      Partnership which is

· Partnership may be particular period of time. specific venture.                    constituted  with

dissolved by any partner by · Such partnership comes · Partnership is automatically  respect to business in

giving a notice to that to an end on the expiry of dissolved at the expiry of the    general.

effect to all the other the fixed period.**        fixed term of on the

partners.                                          completion of the venture.**

**Note: If the partners decide to continue then it becomes a `partnership at will'.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
               4.18                BUSINESS LAWS
                                      Kinds of Partners

    Active         Sleeping Partner                    Nominal Partner          Partner in Profits
    Partner                                                                              Only
               1. No active part in                  1. Partner only in
1. Acts as an  business.                             name.                     1. Entitled to share
agent of                                             2. Not entitle to         profits only.
other          2. Liable like any other              share the profits.
partners.      partner.                              3. Liable as a real       2. Not liable for the
                                                     partner.                  losses.
2.  Public     3. No public notice of                4. Public notice of his
               his retirement.                       retirement.               3. Liable to third
notice of his                                        5. His insanity does      parties for all acts
               4. His insanity doesn't               not dissolve firm.        of profits only.
retirement.    dissolve firm.

 Incoming Partner       Outgoing / Retiring                Sub Partner         Partner by holding

1. Person who                   Partners             1. Partner agrees to            out
comes into a                                         share his share of
partnership firm        1.         Retirement,       profits in a partnership  1. When a person
already in existence                                 firm with an outsider;
with the consent of     expulsion, insolvency or     such an outsider is       represents himself
all existing partners.                               called a sub-partner.
2. No liability for     death.                       2. Neither has rights     or    knowingly
any acts of the firm                                 against the firm nor is
done before his         2. Rest of the partners      he liable for the debts   permits himself,
admission as a                                       of the firm.
partner.                continues to carry on                                  2.    To               be

                        business.                                              represented as a

                        3. Remains liable to third                             partner in a firm

                        parties for all acts of the                            (when in fact he is

                        firm until public notice is                            not)

                        given of his retirement.                               3. He is liable, like a

                                                                               partner in the firm.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. The term `Partnership' has been defined under ____ of the Partnership Act, 1932:
         (a) Section 3
         (b) Section 4
         (c) Section 5
         (d) Section 6

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.19

2. A partnership for which no period or duration is fixed under the Indian Partnership Act
         is known as:
         (a) Unlimited partnership
         (b) Co-ownership
         (c) Particular partnership
         (d) Partnership at will

3. The most important element in partnership is:
         (a) Business
         (b) Sharing of profits
         (c) Agreement
         (d) Business to be carried on by all or any of them acting for all.

4. A firm is the name of:
         (a) The partners
         (b) The minors in the firm
         (c) The business under which the firm carries on business
         (d) The collective name under which it carries on business

5. A partnership formed for the purpose of carrying on particular venture or undertaking is
         known as:
         (a) Limited partnership
         (b) Special partnership
         (c) Joint venture
         (d) Particular partnership

6. In the absence of agreement to the contrary all partners are:
         (a) Not entitled to share profits
         (b) Entitled to share in capital ratio
         (c) Entitled to share in proportion to their ages
         (d) Entitled to share profits equally

7. A partnership at will is one:
         (a) Which does not have any deed
         (b) Which does not have any partner

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.20  BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) Which does not provide for how long the business will continue
         (d) Which cannot be dissolved.
8. What among the following is not an essential element of partnership:
         (a) There must be an agreement entered into by all the persons concerned
         (b) The agreement must be to share the profits of a business
         (c) The business must start within six months from the date of agreement
         (d) The business must be carried on by all or any one of them acting for all.
9. Partnership is a relationship, which arises from:
         (a) Operation of law
         (b) An agreement
         (c) Status
         (d) Almighty
10. Which is not a characteristics of partnership firms?
         (a) Perpetual succession
         (b) Unlimited liability of partners
         (c) Mutual agency
         (d) Sharing of profits of business
11. Select the odd one out of the available options for the entitlement of "Partners in profits only":
         (a) He is entitled to share the profits only.
         (b) He is liable for the losses of the firm.
         (c) He is not liable for the losses of the firm.
         (d) He is liable to the third parties for all acts of the profits only.
12. Mr. Pawan is nominal partner in the partnership firm so he:
         (a) is not entitled to share the profits.
         (b) is entitled to share the profits.
         (c) can take part in the conduct of business.
         (d) Is not liable to third parties for all acts of the firm.
13. When partnership entered into for a fixed term is continued after the expiry of such term,
         it is to be treated as having become a:
         (a) Partnership for a fixed period.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.21

         (b) Particular partnership
         (c) Partnership at will.
         (d) General partnership.
14. Mr. Samarth retires from the partnership firm without giving public notice and his name
         continues to be used on letterhead of the firm. Mr. Samarth is ________ in the case of
         repayment of loan to creditors.
         (a) liable as a partner.
         (b) not liable as a partner.
         (c) responsible.
         (d) liable as a retiring partner.
15. The "dormant partner" of the firm is:
         (a) not required to give notice of his retirement.
         (b) required to give notice of his retirement
         (c) not liable to the third parties for all act of the firm.
         (d) does not share profits and losses.

Descriptive Questions

1. Mr. XU and Mr. YU are partners in a partnership firm. Mr. XU introduced MU (an
         employee) as his partner to ZU. MU remained silent. ZU, a trader believing MU as partner
         supplied 50 Laptops to the firm on credit. After expiry of credit period, ZU did not get
         amount of Laptop sold to the partnership firm. ZU filed a suit against XU and MU for the
         recovery of price. Does MU is liable for such purpose?

2. Ms. Lucy while drafting partnership deed taken care of few important points. What are
         those points? She want to know the list of information which must be part of partnership
         deed drafted by her. Also, give list of information to be included in partnership deed?

3. State giving reasons whether the following are partnerships as per the provisions under
         the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.

         (i) X, Y, and Z agree to divide the profits equally, but the loss, if any, is to be borne
                   by X alone. Is it case of partnership?

         (ii) X, a publisher, agrees to publish a book at his own expense written by Y and to
                   pay Y, half of the net profit. Does this create a relationship of partnership between
                   X and Y? Can paper dealer i.e. third party make Y liable for paper supplied to X?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
            4.22       BUSINESS LAWS

    (iii) A and B purchase a tea shop and incur additional expenses for purchasing
             utensils etc. each contributing half of the total expense. The shop is leased out
             on daily rent which is divided between both. Does this arrangement constitute
             a partnership between A and B?

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1. (b) 2. (d) 3. (d) 4. (d) 5. (d) 6. (d)

7.     (c)  8.    (c)  9.                          (b) 10. (a) 11. (b) 12. (a)

13. (c) 14. (a) 15. (a)

Answers to the Descriptive Questions

1. As per Section 28 of Indian Partnership Act, 1932, Partnership by holding out is also
         known as partnership by estoppel. Where a man holds himself out as a partner, or allows
         others to do it, he is then stopped from denying the character he has assumed and upon
         the faith of which creditors may be presumed to have acted. A person may himself, by
         his words or conduct have induced others to believe that he is a partner or he may have
         allowed others to represent him as a partner. The result in both the cases is identical.

    In the given case, MU (the Manager) is also liable for the price because he becomes a
    partner by holding out as per Section 28 of Indian Partnership Act, 1932.

2. Ms. Lucy while drafting partnership deed must take care of following important points:

    ·       No particular formalities are required for an agreement of partnership.

    ·       Partnership deed may be in writing or formed verbally. The document in writing

            containing the various terms and conditions as to the relationship of the

            partners to each other is called the `partnership deed'.

    ·       Partnership deed should be drafted with care and be stamped according to the

            provisions of the Stamp Act, 1899.

    ·       If partnership comprises immovable property, the instrument of partnership

            must be in writing, stamped and registered under the Registration Act.

    List of information included in Partnership Deed while drafting Partnership Deed by Ms. Lucy:

    ·       Name of the partnership firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
       THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.23

    ·  Names of all the partners.

    ·  Nature and place of the business of the firm.

    ·  Date of commencement of partnership.

    ·  Duration of the partnership firm.

    ·  Capital contribution of each partner.

    ·  Profit Sharing ratio of the partners.

    ·  Admission and Retirement of a partner.

    ·  Rates of interest on Capital, Drawings and loans.

    ·  Provisions for settlement of accounts in the case of dissolution of the firm.

    ·  Provisions for Salaries or commissions, payable to the partners, if any.

    ·  Provisions for expulsion of a partner in case of gross breach of duty or fraud.

    Note: Ms. Lucy may add or delete any provision according to the needs of the
    partnership firm.

3.  As per Section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, "Partnership" is the relation

    between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all

    or any of them acting for all.

    (i) Yes, it is a case of partnership.

       Reason: The sharing of profits is an essential feature of partnership. There can
       be no partnership where only one of the partners is entitled to the whole of the
       profits of the business. Partners must agree to share the profits in any manner
       they choose. But an agreement to share losses is not an essential requirement.
       It is open to one or more partners to agree to share all the losses.

    (ii) No, it is not a case of partnership

       Reason: Sharing of profit, which is a prima facie evidence, exists but mutual
       agency among X and Y, which is an essential element, does not exist here. Since
       there is no partnership, the third party i.e. paper dealer cannot make Y liable
       for the paper supplied by him to X.

    (iii) No, it is not a case of partnership

       Reason: Persons who share amongst themselves the rent derived from a piece
       of land are not partners, rather they are co-owners. Because, neither there is
       existence of business, nor mutual agency is there.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
