           4.24     BUSINESS LAWS

           UNIT ­ 2: RELATIONS OF PARTNERS

                                       LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this unit, you would be able to understand-
 The legal provisions regulating relation of partners' interest as well

       as relations with the third parties.
 The scope of implied authority of a partner to bind the partnership

       by his acts.
 About the various situations in which the constitution of a firm may

       change and its effect on the rights and duties of the partners.
 How the share in a partnership is transferred and what shall be the

       rights and obligations of such transferee.

UNIT OVERVIEW

                                     Relation of partners

Mutual  Relation     Implied                       Admission     Liabilities to                Legal
rights       of     authority                      by partners   third parties          consequences of
  and                                                                                   partner coming
duties  partners        of a                                                            in and going out
        with third   partner

         parties     Extension and
                      Restriction of
   Acts             partner's Implied              Introduction  Retirement  Expulsion                    Death
 beyond                                               of new
 Implied                 Authority                    partner
Authority

                                                                                        Insolvency

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.25

    2.1 RELATION OF PARTNERS TO ONE ANOTHER

The Partnership Act contains various provisions regulating the relationship between partners.

1. GENERAL DUTIES OF PARTNERS (SECTION 9): The partners should carry business of
         the firm to the greatest common advantages and later, they should render to any
         partner or his legal representatives full information of all things affecting the firm. A
         partner must observe the utmost good faith in his dealings with the other partners.

         All the partners are bound to render accounts to each other but where some of the
         accounts are kept by one of them, prima facie he would be the proper person to explain
         and give full information about them.

         Example 1: In a transaction between partners for the sale and purchase of a share in
         the business, if one of them is better acquainted with the accounts than the other, it is
         his duty to disclose all material facts.

2. DUTY TO INDEMNIFY FOR LOSS CAUSED BY FRAUD (SECTION 10): The partner,
         committing fraud in the conduct of the business of the firm, must make good the loss
         sustained by the firm by his misconduct and the amount so brought in the partnership
         should be divided between the partners.

         An act of a partner imputable to the firm or the principles of agency, which is a fraud
         on his co-partners, entitles the co-partners as between themselves, to throw the whole
         of the consequences upon him.

3. DETERMINATION OF RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PARTNERS BY CONTRACT
         BETWEEN THE PARTNERS (SECTION 11):

         (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the mutual rights and duties of the partners
                   of a firm may be determined by contract between the partners, and such
                   contract may be express or may be implied by a course of dealing.

                   Such contract may be varied by consent of all the partners, and such consent
                   may be express or may be implied by a course of dealing.

         (2) Agreements in restraint of trade- Notwithstanding anything contained in
                   section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, such contracts may provide that a
                   partner shall not carry on any business other than that of the firm while he is a
                   partner.

         Partnership is a relation eminently depending on the consent of the parties, not only
         for its existence, but for the terms of the agreement in all things consistent with its
         essential nature and purpose; and an agreement to become partners in the first

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.26  BUSINESS LAWS

         instance, or to vary the terms at any time, need not be manifested in any particular
         form.

4. THE CONDUCT OF THE BUSINESS (SECTION 12): Subject to contract between the
         partners-

         (a) every partner has a right to take part in the conduct of the business;

         (b) every partner is bound to attend diligently to his duties in the conduct of the
                   business;

         (c) any difference arising as to ordinary matters connected with the business may
                   be decided by majority of the partners, and every partner shall have the right
                   to express his opinion before the matter is decided, but no change may be
                   made in the nature of the business without the consent of all partners; and

         (d) every partner has a right to have access to and to inspect and copy any of the
                   books of the firm.

         (e) in the event of the death of a partner, his heirs or legal representatives or their
                   duly authorised agents shall have a right of access to and to inspect the copy
                   of any of the books of the firm.

         (i) Right to take part in the conduct of the Business [Section 12(a)]: Every
                   partner has the right to take part in the business of the firm. This is because
                   partnership business is a business of the partners and their management
                   powers are generally co-extensive.

                   Example 2: Now suppose this management power of the particular partner is
                   interfered with and he has been wrongfully precluded from participating
                   therein. Can the Court interfere in these circumstances? The answer is in the
                   affirmative. The Court can, and will, by injunction, restrain other partners from
                   doing so. It may be noted in this connection that a partner who has been
                   wrongfully deprived of the right of participation in the management has also
                   other remedies, e.g., a suit for dissolution, a suit for accounts without seeking
                   dissolution, etc.

                   The above mentioned provisions of law will be applicable only if there is no
                   contract to the contrary between the partners. It is quite common to find a term
                   in partnership agreements, which gives only limited power of management to
                   a partner or a term that the management of the partnership will remain with
                   one or more of the partners to the exclusion of others. In such a case, the Court
                   will normally be unwilling to interpose with the management with such partner

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.27

                   or partners, unless it is clearly made out that something was done illegally or in
                   breach of the trust reposed in such partners.

         (ii) Right to be consulted [section 12(c)]: Where any difference arises between
                   the partners with regard to the business of the firm, it shall be determined by
                   the views of the majority of them, and every partner shall have the right to
                   express his opinion before the matter is decided. But no change in the nature
                   of the business of the firm can be made without the consent of all the partners.
                   This means that in routine matters, the opinion of the majority of the partners
                   will prevail. Of course, the majority must act in good faith and every partner
                   must be consulted as far as practicable.

                   It may be mentioned that the aforesaid majority rule will not apply where there
                   is a change in the nature of the firm itself. In such a case, the unanimous consent
                   of the partners is needed.

         (iii) Right of access to books [Section 12(d)]: Every partner whether active or
                   sleeping is entitled to have access to any of the books of the firm and to inspect
                   and take out of copy thereof. The right must, however, be exercised bona fide.

         (iv) Right of legal heirs/ representatives/ their duly authorised agents [Section
                   12(e)]: In the event of the death of a partner, his heirs or legal representatives
                   or their duly authorised agents shall have a right of access to and to inspect
                   and copy any of the books of the firm.

5. MUTUAL RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES (SECTION 13): Subject to contract between the
         partners-

         (a) a partner is not entitled to receive remuneration for taking part in the conduct
                   of the business;

         (b) the partners are entitled to share equally in the profits earned, and shall
                   contribute equally to the losses sustained by the firm;

         (c) where a partner is entitled to interest on the capital subscribed by him such interest
                   shall be payable only out of profits;

         (d) a partner making, for the purposes of the business, any payment or advance
                   beyond the amount of capital he has agreed to subscribe, is entitled to interest
                   thereon at the rate of six percent per annum;

         (e) the firm shall indemnify a partner in respect of payments made and liabilities
                   incurred by him-

                   (i) in the ordinary and proper conduct of the business, and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.28  BUSINESS LAWS

         (ii) in doing such act, in an emergency, for the purposes of protecting the
                   firm from loss, as would be done by a person of ordinary prudence, in
                   his own case, under similar circumstances;

(f) a partner shall indemnify the firm for any loss caused to it by his wilful neglect
         in the conduct of business of the firm.

(i) Right to remuneration [Section 13(a)]: No partner is entitled to receive any
         remuneration in addition to his share in the profits of the firm for taking part
         in the business of the firm. But this rule can always be varied by an express
         agreement, or by a course of dealings, in which event the partner will be entitled
         to remuneration. Thus, a partner can claim remuneration even in the absence
         of a contract, when such remuneration is payable under the continued usage
         of the firm. In other words, where it is customary to pay remuneration to a
         partner for conducting the business of the firm, he can claim it even in the
         absence of a contract for the payment of the same.

(ii) Right to share Profits [Section 13(b)]: Partners are entitled to share equally
         in the profits earned and so contribute equally to the losses sustained by the
         firm. The amount of a partner's share must be ascertained by enquiring whether
         there is any agreement in that behalf between the partners. If there is no
         agreement then you should make a presumption of equality and the burden of
         proving that the shares are unequal, will lie on the party alleging the same.

         There is no connection between the proportion in which the partners shall share
         the profits and the proportion in which they have contributed towards the
         capital of the firm.

(iii) Interest on Capital [Section 13(c)]: The following elements must be there
         before a partner can be entitled to interest on moneys brought by him in the
         partnership business: (i) an express agreement to that effect, or practice of the
         particular partnership or (ii) any trade custom to that effect; or (iii) a statutory
         provision which entitles him to such interest.

(iv) Interest on advances [Section 13(d)]: Suppose a partner makes an advance
         to the firm in addition to the amount of capital to be contributed by him, in
         such a case, the partner is entitled to claim interest thereon @ 6% per annum.
         While interest on capital account ceases to run on dissolution, the interest on
         advances keep running even after dissolution and up to the date of payment.

(v) Right to be indemnified [Section 13(e)]: Every partner has the right to be
         indemnified by the firm in respect of payments made and liabilities incurred by
         him in the ordinary and proper conduct of the business of the firm as well as in

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.29

                   the performance of an act in an emergency for protecting the firm from any
                   loss, if the payments, liability and act are such as a prudent man would make,
                   incur or perform in his own case, under similar circumstances.

         (vi) Right to indemnify the firm [Section 13(f)]: A partner must indemnify the
                   firm for any loss caused to it by wilful neglect in the conduct of the business of
                   the firm.

    2.2 PARTNERSHIP PROPERTY (SECTION 14)

1. THE PROPERTY OF THE FIRM (SECTION 14): The expression `property of the firm',
         also referred to as `partnership property', `partnership assets', `joint stock', `common
         stock' or `joint estate', denotes all property, rights and interests to which the firm, that
         is, all partners collectively, may be entitled. The property which is deemed as belonging
         to the firm, in the absence of any agreement between the partners showing contrary
         intention, is comprised of the following items:

         (i) all property, rights and interests which partners may have brought into the
                   common stock as their contribution to the common business;

         (ii) all the property, rights and interest acquired or purchased by or for the firm, or
                   for the purposes and in the course of the business of the firm; and

         (iii) Goodwill of the business.

         The determination of the question whether a particular property is or is not `property'
         of the firm ultimately depends on the real intention or agreement of the partners. Thus,
         the mere fact that the property of a partner is being used for the purposes of the firm
         shall not by itself make it partnership property, unless it is intended to be treated as
         such. Partners may, by an agreement at any time, convert the property of any partner
         or partners (and such conversion, if made in good faith, would be effectual between
         the partners and against the creditors of the firm) or the separate property of any
         partner into a partnership property.

         Goodwill: Section 14 specifically lays down that the goodwill of a business is subject
         to a contract between the partners, to be regarded as `property' of the `firm'. But this
         Section does not define the term Goodwill.

         `Goodwill' is a concept which is very easy to understand but difficult to define. Goodwill
         may be defined as the value of the reputation of a business house in respect of profits
         expected in future over and above the normal level of profits earned by undertaking
         belonging to the same class of business.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.30  BUSINESS LAWS

         When a partnership firm is dissolved every partner has a right, in the absence of any
         agreement to the contrary, to have the goodwill of business sold for the benefit of all
         the partners.

         Goodwill is a part of the property of the firm. It can be sold separately or along with
         the other properties of the firm. Any partner may upon the sale of the goodwill of a
         firm, make an agreement with the buyer that such partner will not carry on any business
         similar to that of the firm within a specified period or within specified local limits and
         notwithstanding anything contained in Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
         Such agreement shall be valid if the restrictions imposed are reasonable.

         Property of a partner: Where the property is exclusively belonging to a person, it
         does not become a property of the partnership merely because it is used for the
         business of the partnership, such property will become property of the partnership if
         there is an agreement.

2. APPLICATION OF THE PROPERTY OF THE FIRM (SECTION 15): Section 15 provides
         that the property of the firm shall be held and used exclusively for the purpose of the
         firm. In partnership, there is a community of interest which all the partners take in the
         property of the firm. But that does not mean than during the subsistence of the
         partnership, a particular partner has any proprietary interest in the assets of the firm.
         Every partner of the firm has a right to get his share of profits till the firm subsists and
         he has also a right to see that all the assets of the partnership are applied to and used
         for the purpose of partnership business.

    2.3 PERSONAL PROFIT EARNED BY PARTNERS

             (SECTION 16)

According to section 16, subject to contract between the partners,-

(a) If a partner derives any profit for himself from any transaction of the firm, or from the
         use of the property or business connection of the firm or the firm name, he shall
         account for that profit and pay it to the firm;

(b) If a partner carries on any business of the same nature as and competing with that of
         the firm, he shall account for and pay to the firm all profits made by him in that
         business.

Example 3: A, B, C & D established partnership business for refining sugar. A, who was himself
a wholesale grocer, was entrusted with the work of selection and purchase of sugar. As a
wholesale grocer, A was well aware of the variations in the sugar market and had the suitable
sense of propriety as regards purchases of sugar. He had already in stock sugar purchased at

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.31

a low price which he sold to the firm when it was in need of some, without informing the
partners that the sugar sold had belonged to him. It was held that A was bound to account to
the firm for the profit so made by him. This rule, however, is subject to a contract between
partners.
Example 4: A, B, C and D started a business in partnership for importing salt from foreign
ports and selling it at Chittagong. A struck certain transactions in salt on his own account,
which were found to be of the same nature as the business carried on by the partnership. It
was held that A was liable to account to the firm for profits of the business so made by him.
This rule is also subject to a contract between the partners.

    2.4 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PARTNERS AFTER A
             CHANGE IN THE FIRM (SECTION 17)

Before going into rights and duties, we should first know how a change may take place in the
constitution of the firm. It may occur in one of the four ways, namely,

         Where a new partner or partners come in

         Where some partner or partners go out, i.e., by death or
         retirement

        Where the partnership concerned carries on business
        other than the business for which it was originally formed

         Where the partnership business is carried out on after
         the expiry of the term fixed for the purpose.

According to section 17, subject to contract between the partners-
(a) after a change in the firm: Where a change occurs in the constitution of a firm, the

         mutual rights and duties of the partners in the reconstituted firm remain the same as
         they were immediately before the change, as far as may be;
(b) after the expiry of the term of the firm: Where a firm constituted for a fixed term
         continues to carry on business after the expiry of that term, the mutual rights and
         duties of the partners remain the same as they were before the expiry, so far as they
         may be consistent with the incidents of partnership at will; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.32  BUSINESS LAWS

(c) where additional undertakings are carried out: where a firm constituted to carry out
         one or more adventures or undertakings carries out other adventures or undertakings
         are the same as those in respect of the original adventures or undertakings.

    2.5 RELATION OF PARTNERS TO THIRD PARTIES

1. PARTNER TO BE AN AGENT OF THE FIRM (SECTION 18): You may recall that a
         partnership is the relationship between the partners who have agreed to share the
         profits of the business carried on by all or any of them acting for all (Section 4). This
         definition suggests that any of the partners can be the agent of the others.

         Section 18 clarifies this position by providing that, subject to the provisions of the Act,
         a partner is the agent of the firm for the purpose of the business of the firm. The
         partner indeed virtually embraces the character of both a principal and an agent. So
         as far as he acts for himself and in his own interest in the common concern of the
         partnership, he may properly be deemed a principal and so far as he acts for his
         partners, he may properly be deemed as an agent.

         The principal distinction between him and a mere agent is that he has a community of
         interest with other partners in the whole property and business and liabilities of
         partnership, whereas an agent as such has no interest in either.

         The rule that a partner is the agent of the firm for the purpose of the business of the
         firm cannot be applied to all transactions and dealings between the partners
         themselves. It is applicable only to the act done by partners for the purpose of the
         business of the firm.

2. IMPLIED AUTHORITY OF PARTNER AS AGENT OF THE FIRM (SECTION 19): Subject
         to the provisions of section 22, the act of a partner which is done to carry on, in the
         usual way, business of the kind carried on by the firm, binds the firm.

         The authority of a partner to bind the firm conferred by this section is called his
         "implied authority".

         (2) In the absence of any usage or custom of trade to the contrary, the implied
                   authority of a partner does not empower him to-

                   (a) Submit a dispute relating to the business of the firm to arbitration;

                   (b) open a banking account on behalf of the firm in his own name;

                   (c) compromise or relinquish any claim or portion of a claim by the firm;

                   (d) withdraw a suit or proceedings filed on behalf of the firm;

                   (e) admit any liability in a suit or proceedings against the firm;

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                         4.33

    (f) acquire immovable property on behalf of the firm;

    (g) transfer immovable property belonging to the firm; and

    (h) enter into partnership on behalf of the firm.

MODE OF DOING ACT TO BIND FIRM (SECTION 22): In order to bind a firm, an act
or instrument done or executed by a partner or other person on behalf of the firm shall
be done or executed in the firm name, or in any other manner expressing or implying
an intention to bind the firm.

At the very outset, you should understand what is meant by "implied authority". You
have just read that every partner is an agent of the firm for the purpose of the business
thereof. Consequently, as between the partners and the outside world (whatever may
be their private arrangements between themselves), each partner is agent of every
other in every matter connected with the partnership business; his acts bind the firm.

Sections 19(1) and 22 deal with the implied authority of a partner. The impact of
these Sections is that the act of a partner which is done to carry on, in the usual way,
business of the kind carried on by the firm binds the firm, provided that the act is done
in the firm name, or any manner expressing or implying an intention to bind the firm.
Such an authority of a partner to bind the firm is called his implied authority. It is
however subject to the following restrictions:

1.  The act done must relate to the usual business of the firm, that is, the act done

    by the partner must be within the scope of his authority and related to the

    normal business of the firm.

2.  The act is such as is done for normal conduct of business of the firm. The usual

    way of carrying on the business will depend on the nature and circumstances

    of each particular case [Section 19(1)].

3.  The act to be done in the name of the firm or in any other manner expressing

    or implying an intention to bind the firm (Section 22).

    Thus, a partner has implied authority to bind the firm by all acts done by him
    in all matters connected with the partnership business and which are done in
    the usual way and are not in their nature beyond the scope of partnership. You
    must remember that an implied authority of a partner may differ in different
    kinds of business.

Example 5: X, a partner in a firm of solicitors, borrows money and executes a
promissory note in the name of firm without authority. The other partners are not liable
on the note, as it is not part of the ordinary business of a solicitor to draw, accept, or

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    4.34  BUSINESS LAWS

endorse negotiable instruments; however, it may be usual for one partner of firm of
bankers to draw, accept or endorse a bill of exchange on behalf of the firm.

If partnership be of a general commercial nature,

(i) he may pledge or sell the partnership property;

(ii) he may buy goods on account of the partnership;

(iii) he may borrow money, contract debts and pay debts on account of the
         partnership;

(iv) he may draw, make, sign, endorse, transfer, negotiate and procure to be
         discounted, Promissory notes, bills of exchange, cheques and other negotiable
         papers in the name and on account of the partnership.

Section 19(2) contains the acts which are beyond the implied authority of the partners.

3. EXTENSION AND RESTRICTION OF PARTNERS' IMPLIED AUTHORITY (SECTION 20):

The implied authority of a partner may be extended or restricted by contract between
the partners. Under the following conditions, the restrictions imposed on the implied
authority of a partner by agreement shall be effective against a third party:

1.  The third party knows about the restrictions, and

2.  The third party does not know that he is dealing with a partner in a firm.

Example 6: A, a partner, borrows from B ` 1,000 in the name of the firm but in excess
of his authority, and utilizes the same in paying off the debts of the firm. Here, the fact
that the firm has contracted debts suggests that it is a trading firm, and as such it is
within the implied authority of A to borrow money for the business of the firm. This
implied authority, as you have noticed, may be restricted by an agreement between
him and other partners. Now if B, the lender, is unaware of this restriction imposed on
A, the firm will be liable to repay the money to B. On the contrary, B's awareness as to
this restriction will absolve the firm of its liability to repay the amount to B.

It may be noted that the above-mentioned extension or restriction is only possible with
the consent of all the partners. Any one partner, or even a majority of the partners,
cannot restrict or extend the implied authority.

4. PARTNER'S AUTHORITY IN AN EMERGENCY (SECTION 21)

According to section 21, a partner has authority, in an emergency, to do all such acts
for the purpose of protecting the firm from loss as would be done by a person of
ordinary prudence, in his own case, acting under similar circumstances, and such acts
bind the firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.35

    2.6 EFFECT OF ADMISSIONS BY A PARTNER

             (SECTION 23)

Partners, as agents of each other can make binding admissions but only in relation to
partnership transaction and in the ordinary course of business. An admission or representation
by a partner will not however, bind the firm if his authority on the point is limited and the other
party knows of the restriction. The section speaks of admissions and representations being
evidenced against the firm. That is to say, they will affect the firm when tendered by third parties;
they may not have the same effect in case of disputes between the partners themselves.

Example 7: X and Y are partners in a firm dealing in spare parts of different brands of
motorcycle bikes. Z purchases a spare part for his Yamaha motorcycle after being told by X
that the spare part is suitable for his motorcycle. Y is ignorant about this transaction. The
spare part proves to be unsuitable for the motorcycle and it is damaged. X and Y both are
responsible to Z for his loss.

    2.7 EFFECT OF NOTICE TO ACTING PARTNER

             (SECTION 24)

The notice to a partner, who habitually acts in business of the firm, on matters relating to the
affairs of the firm, operates as a notice to the firm except in the case of a fraud on the firm
committed by or with the consent of that partner. Thus, the notice to one is equivalent to the
notice to the rest of the partners of the firm, just as a notice to an agent is notice to his
principal. This notice must be actual and not constructive. It must be received by a working
partner and not by a sleeping partner. It must further relate to the firm's business. Only then
it would constitute a notice to the firm.

Example 8: P, Q, and R are partners in a business for purchase and sale of second hand goods.
R purchases a second hand car on behalf of the firm from S. In the course of dealings with S,
he comes to know that the car is a stolen one and it actually belongs to X. P and Q are ignorant
about it. All the partners are liable to X, the real owner.

The only exception would lie in the case of fraud, whether active or tacit.

Example 9: A, a partner who actively participates in the management of the business of the
firm, bought for his firm, certain goods, while he knew of a particular defect in the goods. His
knowledge as regards the defect, ordinarily, would be construed as the knowledge of the firm,
though the other partners in fact were not aware of the defect. But because A had, in league
with his seller, conspired to conceal the defect from the other partners, the rule would be
inoperative and the other partners would be entitled to reject the goods, upon detection by
them of the defect.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.36  BUSINESS LAWS

    2.8 LIABILITY TO THIRD PARTIES (SECTION 25 TO 27)

The question of liability of partners to third parties may be considered under different heads.
These are as follows:

1. LIABILITY OF A PARTNER FOR ACTS OF THE FIRM (SECTION 25): The partners are
         jointly and severally responsible to third parties for all acts which come under the scope
         of their express or implied authority. This is because that all the acts done within the
         scope of authority are the acts done towards the business of the firm.

         The expression `act of firm' connotes any act or omission by all the partners or by any
         partner or agent of the firm, which gives rise to a right enforceable by or against the
         firm. Again, in order to bring a case under Section 25, it is necessary that the act of the
         firm, in respect of which liability is brought to be enforced against a party, must have
         been done while he was a partner.

         Example 10: Certain persons were found to have been partners in a firm when the acts
         constituting an infringement of a trademark by the firm took place, it was held that
         they were liable for damages arising out of the alleged infringement, it being
         immaterial that the damages arose after the dissolution of the firm.

2. LIABILITY OF THE FIRM FOR WRONGFUL ACTS OF A PARTNER (SECTION 26): The
         firm is liable to the same extent as the partner for any loss or injury caused to a third
         party by the wrongful acts of a partner, if they are done by the partner while acting:

         (a) in the ordinary course of the business of the firm

         (b) with the authority of the partners.

         If the act in question can be regarded as authorized and as falling within either of the
         categories mentioned in Section 26, the fact that the method employed by the partner
         in doing it was unauthorized or wrongful would not affect the question. Furthermore,
         all the partners in a firm are liable to a third party for loss or injury caused to him by
         the negligent act of a partner acting in the ordinary course of the business.

         Example 11: One of the two partners in coal mine acted as a manager was guilty of
         personal negligence in omitting to have the shaft of the mine properly fenced. As a
         result thereof, an injury was caused to a workman. The other partner was also held
         responsible for the same.

3. LIABILITY OF FIRM FOR MISAPPLICATION BY PARTNERS (SECTION 27):

         It may be observed that the workings of the two clauses of Section 27 is designed to
         bring out clearly an important point of distinction between the two categories of cases
         of misapplication of money by partners.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.37

   Clause (a) covers the case where a partner acts within his authority and due to his
   authority as partner, he receives money or property belonging to a third party and
   misapplies that money or property. For this provision to the attracted, it is not
   necessary that the money should have actually come into the custody of the firm.

   On the other hand, the provision of clause (b) would be attracted when such money or
   property has come into the custody of the firm and it is misapplied by any of the
   partners.

   The firm would be liable in both the cases.

   If receipt of money by one partner is not within the scope of his apparent authority,
   his receipt cannot be regarded as a receipt by the firm and the other partners will not
   be liable, unless the money received comes into their possession or under their control.

   Example 12: A, B, and C are partners of a place for car parking. P stands his car in the
   parking place but A sold out the car to a stranger. For this liability, the firm is liable for
   the acts of A.

2.9 RIGHTS OF TRANSFEREE OF A PARTNER'S
         INTEREST (SECTION 29)

   A share in a partnership is transferable like any other property, but as the partnership
   relationship is based on mutual confidence, the assignee of a partner's interest by sale,
   mortgage or otherwise cannot enjoy the same rights and privileges as the original
   partner.

   The rights of such a transferee are as follows:

   (I) During the continuance of partnership, such transferee is not entitled:

             (a) to interfere with the conduct of the business,

             (b) to require accounts, or

             (c) to inspect books of the firm.

             He is only entitled to receive the share of the profits of the transferring partner
             and he is bound to accept the profits as agreed to by the partners, i.e., he
             cannot challenge the accounts.

   (II) On the dissolution of the firm or on the retirement of the transferring partner,
             the transferee will be entitled, against the remaining partners:

             (a) to receive the share of the assets of the firm to which the transferring
                       partner was entitled, and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.38  BUSINESS LAWS

                   (b) for the purpose of ascertaining the share,

         he is entitled to an account as from the date of the dissolution.

         By virtue of Section 31, which we will discuss hereinafter, no person can be introduced
         as a partner in a firm without the consent of all the partners. A partner cannot by
         transferring his own interest, make anybody else a partner in his place, unless the other
         partners agree to accept that person as a partner. At the same time, a partner is not
         debarred from transferring his interest. A partner's interest in the partnership can be
         regarded as an existing interest and tangible property which can be assigned.

    2.10 MINORS ADMITTED TO THE BENEFITS OF
             PARTNERSHIP (SECTION 30)

You have observed that a minor cannot be bound by a contract because a minor's contract is
void and not merely voidable. Therefore, a minor cannot become a partner in a firm because
partnership is founded on a contract. Though a minor cannot be a partner in a firm, he can
nonetheless be admitted to the benefits of partnership under Section 30 of the Act. In other
words, he can be validly given a share in the partnership profits. When this has been done
with the consent of all the partners then the rights and liabilities of such a partner will be
governed under Section 30 as follows:

(1) Rights:

         (i) A minor partner has a right to his agreed share of the profits and of the firm.

         (ii) He can have access to, inspect and copy the accounts of the firm.

         (iii) He can sue the partners for accounts or for payment of his share but only when
                   severing his connection with the firm, and not otherwise.

         (iv) On attaining majority, he may within 6 months elect to become a partner or not
                   to become a partner. If he elects to become a partner, then he is entitled to the
                   share to which he was entitled as a minor. If he does not, then his share is not
                   liable for any acts of the firm after the date of the public notice served to that
                   effect.

(2) Liabilities:

         (i) Before attaining majority:

                   (a) The liability of the minor is confined only to the extent of his share in
                             the profits and the property of the firm.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.39

         (b) Minor has no personal liability for the debts of the firm incurred during
                   his minority.

         (c) Minor cannot be declared insolvent, but if the firm is declared insolvent
                   his share in the firm vests in the Official Receiver/Assignee (which
                   means minor can recover his share in the firm on proportionate basis
                   from official receiver/assignee)

(ii) After attaining majority:

         Within 6 months of his attaining majority or on his obtaining knowledge that
         he had been admitted to the benefits of partnership, whichever date is later,
         the minor partner has to decide whether he shall remain a partner or leave the
         firm.

         Where he has elected not to become partner, he may give public notice that he
         has elected not to become partner and such notice shall determine his position
         with regard to the firm If he fails to give such notice he shall become a partner
         in the firm on the expiry of the said six months.

         (a) When he becomes partner: If the minor becomes a partner on his
                   own willingness or by his failure to give the public notice within
                   specified time, his rights and liabilities as given in Section 30(7) are as
                   follows:

                   (i) He becomes personally liable to third parties for all acts of the
                             firm done since he was admitted to the benefits of partnership.

                   (ii) His share in the property and the profits of the firm remains the
                             same to which he was entitled as a minor.

         (b) When he elects not to become a partner:

                   (i) His rights and liabilities continue to be those of a minor up to
                             the date of giving public notice.

                   (ii) His share shall not be liable for any acts of the firm done after
                             the date of the notice.

                   (iii) He shall be entitled to sue the partners for his share of the
                             property and profits. It may be noted that such minor shall give
                             notice to the Registrar that he has or has not become a partner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.40  BUSINESS LAWS

    2.11 LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF PARTNER COMING IN

             AND GOING OUT (SECTION 31 ­ 35)

Any change in the relation of partners will result in reconstitution of the partnership firm.
Thus, on admission of a new partner or retirement of a partner or expulsion of the partner, or
on insolvency of a partner etc. a firm will be reconstituted:

(i) INTRODUCTION OF A PARTNER (SECTION 31):

         As we have studied earlier, subject to a contract between partners and to the provisions
         regarding minors in a firm, no new partners can be introduced into a firm without the
         consent of all the existing partners.

         Rights and liabilities of new partner: The liabilities of the new partner ordinarily
         commence from the date when he is admitted as a partner, unless he agrees to be
         liable for obligations incurred by the firm prior to the date. The new firm, including the
         new partner who joins it, may agree to assume liability for the existing debts of the old
         firm, and creditors may agree to accept the new firm as their debtor and discharge the
         old partners. The creditor's consent is necessary in every case to make the transaction
         operative. Novation is the technical term in a contract for substituted liability, of
         course, not confined only to case of partnership.

         But a mere agreement amongst partners cannot operate as Novation. Thus, an
         agreement between the partners and the incoming partner that he shall be liable for
         existing debts will not ipso facto give creditors of the firm any right against him.

         In case of partnership of two partners: This section does not apply to a partnership
         of two partners which is automatically dissolved by the death of one of them.

(ii) RETIREMENT OF A PARTNER (SECTION 32):

         (1) A partner may retire:

                   (a) with the consent of all the other partners;

                   (b) in accordance with an express agreement by the partners; or

                   (c) where the partnership is at will, by giving notice in writing to all the
                             other partners of his intention to retire.

         (2) A retiring partner may be discharged from any liability to any third party for
                   acts of the firm done before his retirement by an agreement made by him with
                   such third party and the partners of the reconstituted firm, and such agreement
                   may be implied by a course of dealing between the third party and the
                   reconstituted firm after he had knowledge of the retirement.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.41

         (3) Notwithstanding the retirement of a partner from a firm, he and the partners
                   continue to be liable as partners to third parties for any act done by any of
                   them which would have been an act of the firm if done before the retirement,
                   until public notice is given of the retirement:

                   Provided that a retired partner is not liable to any third party who deals with
                   the firm without knowing that he was a partner.

         (4) Notices under sub-section (3) may be given by the retired partner or by any
                   partner of the reconstituted firm.

         In Vishnu Chandra Vs. Chandrika Prasad [Supreme Court]

         The Supreme Court in Vishnu Chandra Vs. Chandrika Prasad, held that the expression
         `if any partner wants to dissociate from the partnership business', in a clause of the
         partnership deed which was being construed, comprehends a situation where a partner
         wants to retire from the partnership. The expression clearly indicated that in the event
         of retirement, the partnership business will not come to an end.

         Example 13: Mere retirement of a partner, who was the tenant of the premises in
         which the partnership business was carried out, would not result in assignment of the
         tenancy rights in favour of the remaining partners even though the retiring partner
         ceases to have any right, title or interest in the business as such.

(iii) EXPULSION OF A PARTNER (SECTION 33):

         (i) the power of expulsion must have existed in a contract between the partners;

         (ii) the power has been exercised by a majority of the partners; and

         (iii) it has been exercised in good faith.

         If all these conditions are not present, the expulsion is not deemed to be in bona fide
         interest of the business of the firm.

         The test of good faith as required under Section 33(1) includes three things:

                                                   The explusion must be in the interest of the
                                                                        partnership

                                                   The partner to be expelled is served with a
                                                                            notice

                                                   He is given an opportunity of being heard.

If a partner is otherwise expelled, the expulsion is null and void.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.42  BUSINESS LAWS

         It may be noted that under the Act, the expulsion of partners does not necessarily
         result in dissolution of the firm. The invalid expulsion of a partner does not put an end
         to the partnership even if the partnership is at will and it will be deemed to continue
         as before.

         Example 14: A, B and C are partners in a Partnership firm. They were carrying their
         business successfully for the past several years. Spouses of A and B fought in ladies
         club on their personal issue and A's wife was hurt badly. A got angry on the incident
         and he convinced C to expel B from their partnership firm. B was expelled from
         partnership without any notice from A and C. Considering the provisions of Indian
         Partnership Act, 1932 state whether they can expel a partner from the firm?

         A partner may not be expelled from a firm by a majority of partners except in exercise,
         in good faith, of powers conferred by contract between the partners. It is, thus,
         essential that:

         (i) the power of expulsion must have existed in a contract between the partners;

         (ii) the power has been exercised by a majority of the partners; and

         (iii) it has been exercised in good faith.

         If all these conditions are not present, the expulsion is not deemed to be in bonafide
         interest of the business of the firm.

         Thus, according to the test of good faith as required under Section 33(1), expulsion of
         Partner B is not valid.

         In this context, you should also remember that provisions of Sections 32 (2), (3) and
         (4) which we have just discussed, will be equally applicable to an expelled partner as if
         he was a retired partner.

(iv) INSOLVENCY OF A PARTNER (SECTION 34):

         (1) Where a partner in a firm is adjudicated as an insolvent he ceases to be a partner
                   on the date on which the order of adjudication is made, whether or not the firm
                   is hereby dissolved.

         (2) Where under a contract between the partners the firm is not dissolved by the
                   adjudication of a partner as an insolvent, the estate of a partner so adjudicated
                   is not liable for any act of the firm and the firm is not liable for any act of the
                   insolvent, done after the date on which the order of adjudication is made.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                               4.43

                           The estate of the insolvent         The firm is also not liable
                           partner is not liable for the            for any act of the
                            act of the firm done after
                                                               insolvent partner after the
                               the date of order of                date of the order of
                                    adjudication                        adjudication

He will be ceased to be a
  partner from the very

date on which the order
of adjudication is made.

The insolvent partner                              Effects of   Ordinarily but not invariably,
cannot be continued                                Insolvency    the insolvency of a partner
                                                               results in dissolution of a firm;
     as a partner.
                                                                     but the partners are
                                                                competent to agree among

                                                                     themselves that the
                                                                adjudication of a partner as
                                                               an insolvent will not give rise
                                                                  to dissolution of the firm.

(v) LIABILITY OF ESTATE OF DECEASED PARTNER (SECTION 35):

         Ordinarily, the effect of the death of a partner is the dissolution of the partnership, but
         the rule in regard to the dissolution of the partnership, by death of partner is subject
         to a contract between the parties and the partners are competent to agree that the
         death of one will not have the effect of dissolving the partnership as regards the
         surviving partners unless the firm consists of only two partners. In order that the estate
         of the deceased partner may be absolved from liability for the future obligations of
         the firm, it is not necessary to give any notice either to the public or the persons having
         dealings with the firm.

         Example 15: X was a partner in a firm. The firm ordered goods in X's lifetime; but the
         delivery of the goods was made after X's death. In such a case, X's estate would not be
         liable for the debt; a creditor can have only a personal decree against the surviving
         partners and a decree against the partnership assets in the hands of those partners. A
         suit for goods sold and delivered would not lie against the representatives of the
         deceased partner. This is because there was no debt due in respect of the goods in X's
         lifetime.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.44  BUSINESS LAWS

    2.12 RIGHTS OF OUTGOING PARTNER TO CARRY ON
             COMPETING BUSINESS (SECTION 36)

An outgoing partner may carry on business competing with that of the firm and he may
advertise such business, but subject to contract to the contrary, he may not,-

(a) use the firm name,

(b) represent himself as carrying on the business of the firm or

(c) solicit the custom of persons who were dealing with the firm before he ceased to be a
         partner.

Agreement in restraint of trade- A partner may make an agreement with his partners that
on ceasing to be a partner he will not carry on any business similar to that of the firm within
a specified period or within specified local limits and, notwithstanding anything contained in
section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, such agreement shall be valid if the restrictions
imposed are reasonable.

    2.13 RIGHT OF OUTGOING PARTNER IN CERTAIN
             CASES TO SHARE SUBSEQUENT PROFITS
             (SECTION 37)

According to section 37, Where any member of a firm has died or otherwise ceased to be
partner, and the surviving or continuing partners carry on the business of the firm with the
property of the firm without any final settlement of accounts as between them and the
outgoing partner or his estate, then, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, the outgoing
partner or his estate is entitled at the option of himself or his representatives to such share of
the profits made since he ceased to be a partner as may be attributable to the use of his share
of the property of the firm or to interest at the rate of six per cent per annum on the amount
of his share in the property of the firm:

Provided that whereby contract between the partners, an option is given to surviving or
continuing partners to purchase the interest of a deceased or outgoing partner, and that
option is duly exercised, the estate of the deceased partner, or the outgoing partner or his
estate, as the case may be, is not entitled to any further or other share of profits; but if any
partner assuming to act in exercise of the option does not in all material respects comply with
the terms thereof, he is liable to account under the foregoing provisions of this section.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.45

Example 16: A, B and C are partners in a manufacture of machinery. A is entitled to three-
eighths of the partnership property and profits. A becomes bankrupt whereas B and C
continue the business without paying out A's share of the partnership assets or settling
accounts with his estate. A's estate is entitled to three-eighths of the profits made in the
business, from the date of his bankruptcy until the final liquidation of the partnership affairs.

Example 17: A, B and C are partners. C retires after selling his share in the partnership firm. A
and B fail to pay the value of the share to C as agreed to. The value of the share of C on the
date of his retirement from the firm would be pure debt from the date on which he ceased to
be a partner as per the agreement entered between the parties. C is entitled to recover the
same with interest.

    2.14 REVOCATION OF CONTINUING GUARANTEE BY

             CHANGE IN FIRM (SECTION 38)

According to section 38, a continuing guarantee given to a firm or to third party in respect of
the transaction of a firm is, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary, revoked as to
future transactions from the date of any change in the constitution of the firm.

SUMMARY

The mutual rights and duties of partners are regulated by the contract between them. Such
contract need not always be expressed, it may be implied from the course of dealing between
the partners (Section 11). Section 12 gives rules regulating the conduct of the business by the
partners and Section 13 lay down rules of mutual rights and liabilities. Sections 14 to 17 also
contain particular rules which become useful and important while determining the relations
of partners to one - another. What is essential to note, however, is that all these rules are
subject to contract between the parties.

As regards third parties, a partner is the agent of the firm for all purposes within the scope of
the partnership concern. His rights, powers, duties and obligations are in many respects
governed by the same rules and principles which apply to the agent. Generally, he may pledge
or sell the partnership property; he may buy goods on account of the firm; he may borrow
money, contract debt and pay debts on account of the firm; he may draw, make, sign, endorse,
accept, transfer, negotiate and get discounted promissory notes, bills of exchange, cheques
and other negotiable papers in the name and account of the firm. The implied authority of
the partner to bind the firm is restricted to acts usually done in the business of the kind carried
on by the firm. He is also empowered under the Act to do certain acts in an emergency so as
to bind the firm. The firm, however, is bound only by those acts of a partner which were done
by him in his capacity as a partner.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
                  4.46   BUSINESS LAWS

A partner may in some circumstances become liable on equitable grounds for obligations
incurred by a co-partner in doing acts in excess of his authority, real or implied. He may also
become liable for an unauthorized act of his co-partner on the ground of estoppel.

                                   PARTNERS RIGHTS/DUTIES/LIABILITIES

Rights of a Partner      Acts within implied           Acts beyond         Duties of a Partner
                              authority of          implied authority
1. Take part in the              Partner                                   1. Carry on the
                                                         of Partner
conduct of business.     1. Purchase goods.        1. Submit a             business of the firm.
                         2. Sell the goods.        dispute to
2. Express his           3. Settle accounts.       arbitration.            2. To be just and
                         4. Receive payment        2. Opening a bank
opinion.                 of firm.                  account.                faithful to each other.
                         5. Engage servants        3. Compromising
3. Access to and         for firm.                 or relinquishing any    3. To render true
                         6. Engage a lawyer to     claim.
inspect and copy any     defend an action          4. Withdrawal a         accounts and full
                         brought against the       suit or proceeding.
of the books.            firm.                     5. Admit any            information.
                         7. Borrow money for       liability in a suit or
4. Share profits &       firm's business.          proceeding.             4. To attend diligently
                         8. Pledge the goods       6. Acquire
property.                of the firm as            immovable               to his duties without any
                         security for the          property.
5. Interest on           repayment of              7. Transfer             remuneration.
                         borrowings made           immovable
capital.                 for firm's business.      property.               5. Not to carry on any
                         9. Draw, accept, and      8. Enter into
6. Interest on           endorse bill of           partnership on          business other than that
                         exchange and other        behalf of the firm.
advance.                 negotiable                Note : The firm is      of the firm while he is a
                         instruments in the        not liable to third
7. To be                 name of the firm.         party for the above     partner, if restrained by
                                                   restricted acts of a
indemnified.                                       partner whether or      an agreement with
                                                   not the person
8. Not to be expelled                              dealing with the        other partners.
                                                   firm know about
unless         majority                            such restrictions.      6. If a partner carries

partners agree and                                                         on any business

provision to that                                                          competing with that of

effect exists in                                                           the firm, he shall

agreement.                                                                 account for and pay to

9. Resist the                                                              the firm all profits made

introduction of a new                                                      by him in that business.

partner.                                                                   7. To account for any

10. Right to retire.                                                       secret profit, from the

11. Right of outgoing                                                      firm.

partner to carry on a                                                      8. Not to assign his

competing business.                                                        share.

12. Right of outgoing                                                      9. To         contribute

partner to share                                                           equally to the losses of

subsequent profits.                                                        the firm.

13. Right to dissolve                                                      10. To indemnify the

the firm.                                                                  firm for loss caused by

                                                                           his willful neglect or

                                                                           fraud.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                                             4.47

                         MINOR AS A PARTNER: SEC. 30

 Cannot be partner but enter  Right to have access,  On attaining majority, he

into partnership with                              inspect and to take       can decide, within 6

consent of all partners for                        copies of the books of    months, whether he

the benefits only.                                 accounts of the firm.     would continue or not

 Agreement with or by a  Not entitled to take                                and give public notice of

minor is void ab-initio.                           part in the day to day    his decision. Otherwise,

 Right to receive his agreed                       affairs of the firm.      he will be liable for debts

share of property and of the  Right to bring a suit                          with retrospective effect.

profits of the firm.                               against the partners for  His share in the property

 No personal liability.                            an account or payment     and profits of the firm

                                                   of his share of property  shall be liable if he

                                                   or profits of the firm.   chooses to be a partner

                                                                              His share of profits shall

                                                                             remain the same.

                          RECONSTITUTION OF FIRM

    Introduction of a partner (Sec. 31)                     Retirement of a Partner (Sec. 32)

Admission of a new partner, either-                Retirement of the partner, either-
   with the consent of all existing
  partners, or                                        with the consent of all existing partners, or
   as per partnership deed.                           as per partnership deed or
                                                      where the partnership is at will, by giving
The liability of a new partner from the date         notice in writing to all the other partners.
of joining unless otherwise agreed.
Liability for the acts of the old firm only if:               Liability of the retiring partner

   the new firm assumes the liabilities            A retiring partner continues to be liable as
        of the old firm, and                       partner after the retirement until public notice is
                                                   given of the retirement.
   the creditors accept the new firm as
        their debtor.                                Discharge of retiring partner for acts of the
                                                             firm done before his retirement
Note: A minor who, on attaining majority
decides to become a partner is liable for all      1. By an agreement b/w third party and remaining
acts of the firm done since he was admitted        partners.
to benefits of partnership.                        2. By an implied agreement to above effect. (E.g.
                                                   Dealing between such third party and the
                                                   reconstituted firm, after he (the third party) had
                                                   the knowledge of the retirement.)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.48  BUSINESS LAWS

           Expulsion of a partner                           Insolvency of a partner (Sec. 34)
                     (Sec. 33)                     1. The insolvent partner ceases to be a partner on
                                                   the date on which the order of adjudication is
Three conditions:                                  made.
(a) As per contract between the partners           2. The firm is dissolved unless otherwise
&                                                  specifically provided in deed.
(b) Majority of the partners &                     3. The estate of the insolvent is not liable for the
(c) In good faith.                                 acts of the firm done after the date of the order
                                                   of adjudication.
                    Otherwise                      4. The firm is not liable for any act of the insolvent
Partner may claim re-instatement as a              partner after the date of the order of
partner, or                                        adjudication.
may sue for the refund of his share of             5. No public notice is required on insolvency of
capital and profits in the firm.                   partner.

            Rights and Liabilities
Same as that of a retiring partner.

       Death of a Partner (Sec. 35)                              Rights of outgoing partner
                                                   To carry on competing business but he may not-
1. The firm is dissolved unless otherwise          (i) use the firm name;
specifically provided in deed.                     (ii) represent himself as carrying on the business
                                                   of firm, or
2. The estate of the deceased partner is           (iii) solicit the customers who were dealing with the
not liable for any act of the firm done            firm before he ceased to be a partner. (Sec. 36)
after his death.                                   If final settlement is pending, legal
                                                   representatives of the deceased partner or the
3. No public notice is required of the             retiring partner are entitled to any of the following
death of a partner.                                two options:
                                                   (a) Share of the profit earned after the death or
                 General Notes                     retirement.
                                                   (b) Claim interest at the rate of 6 per cent per
(a) Unless otherwise agreed by partners,           annum on the amount of his share in the property.
a continuing guarantee given to third              (Sec. 37)
party by the firm is revoked as to the
future transactions from the date of any
change in the constitution of the firm.
(Sec. 38)

(b) The rights and duties of the partners
of the reconstituted firm shall be the
same as they were before change of the
firm. (Sec. 17)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.49

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. A partner can be expelled if:
         (a) Such expulsion is in good faith
         (b) The majority of the partner does not agree on such expulsion
         (c) The expelled partner is given an opportunity to start a business competing with
                   that of the firm
         (d) Compensation is paid

2. Which of the following is not the right of partner i.e., which he cannot claim as a matter
         of right?
         (a) Right to take part in business
         (b) Right to have access to account books
         (c) Right to share profits
         (d) Right to receive remuneration.

3. Which of the following acts are not included in the implied authority of a partner?
         (a) To buy or sell goods on accounts of partners.
         (b) To borrow money for the purpose of firm.
         (c) To enter into partnership on behalf of firm.
         (d) To engage a lawyer to defend actions against firm.

4. The reconstitution of the firm takes place in case of
         (a) Admission of a partner
         (b) Retirement of a partner
         (c) Expulsion or death of a partner
         (d) All of the above

5. A new partner can be admitted in the firm with the consent of
         (a) All the partners
         (b) Simple majority of partners

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.50  BUSINESS LAWS

         (c) Special majority of partners
         (d) New partner only.
6. A partner may be expelled from the firm on the fulfilment of the conditions that the
         expulsion power is exercised.
         (a) As given by express contract
         (b) By majority of partners
         (c) In absolute good faith
         (d) All of the above
7. A minor is:
         (a) A partner of a firm
         (b) Representative of the firm
         (c) Entitled to carry on the business of the firm
         (d) Entitled to the benefits of the firm
8. If a partner commits fraud in the conduct of the business of the firm:
         (a) He shall indemnify the firm for any loss caused to it by his fraud
         (b) He is not liable to the firm.
         (c) He is liable to the partners
         (d) He is liable to the third parties
9. Partners are bound to carry on the business of the firm-
         (a) To the greatest common advantage
         (b) For the welfare of the society
         (c) For the advantage of the family members
         (d) For earning personal profits
10. The liability of a minor partner is limited to the extent of:
         (a) His share in the firm
         (b) His personal assets
         (c) His share in the firm as well as his personal assets
         (d) He is not liable

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.51

11. The authority of a partner to bind the firm for his acts as contained in section 19 of the
         Partnership Act is known as:
         (a) Express authority
         (b) Legal authority
         (c) Implied authority
         (d) Managerial authority

12. Which are the matters that require unanimous consent of all the partners:
         (a) Admission of a partner
         (b) Transfer by a partner of his interest in the firm
         (c) Fundamental change in the nature of the business
         (d) All of the above

13. For admitting a minor into the benefits of the partnership, which of the following is
         required?
         (a) Consent of the minor's guardian
         (b) Consent of the Registrar of firms
         (c) Consent of all the partners of the firm
         (d) All of the above

14. The implied authority of a partner of the firm does empower him to:
         (a) Open a bank account on behalf of the firm in his own name.
         (b) Enter into partnership on behalf of the firm.
         (c) Acquire immovable property on behalf of the firm.
         (d) Act expressing or implying an intention to bind the firm.

15. In case of transfer of share in a partnership firm by one partner to any third party give
         such third party entitlement:
         (a) to interfere with the conduct of the business.
         (b) to require accounts.
         (c) to receive the share of the profits of the transferring partner as agreed by the
                   partners.
         (d) to receive the share of the profits of the transferring partner whether or not
                   agreed by the partners.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.52  BUSINESS LAWS

Descriptive Questions

1. State the modes by which a partner may transfer his interest in the firm in favour of
         another person under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. What are the rights of such a
         transferee?

2. Whether a minor may be admitted in the business of a partnership firm? Explain the
         rights of a minor in the partnership firm.

3. M/s XYZ & Associates, a partnership firm with X, Y, Z as senior partners were engaged
         in the business of carpet manufacturing and exporting to foreign countries. On 25th
         August, 2018, they inducted Mr. G, an expert in the field of carpet manufacturing as their
         partner. On 10th January 2020, Mr. G was blamed for unauthorized activities and thus
         expelled from the partnership by united approval of rest of the partners.

         (i) Examine whether action by the partners was justified or not?

         (ii) What should have the factors to be kept in mind prior expelling a partner from
                   the firm by other partners according to the provisions of the Indian Partnership
                   Act, 1932?

4. A, B and C are partners in a firm. As per terms of the partnership deed, A is entitled to
         20 percent of the partnership property and profits. A retires from the firm and dies after
         15 days. B and C continue business of the firm without settling accounts. Explain the
         rights of A's legal representatives against the firm under the Indian Partnership Act,
         1932?

5. Master X was introduced to the benefits of partnership of M/s ABC & Co. with the consent
         of all partners. After attaining majority, more than six months elapsed and he failed to
         give a public notice as to whether he elected to become or not to become a partner in
         the firm. Later on, Mr. L, a supplier of material to M/s ABC & Co., filed a suit against M/s
         ABC & Co. for recovery of the debt due.

         In the light of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, explain:

         (i) To what extent X will be liable if he failed to give public notice after attaining
                   majority?

         (ii) Can Mr. L recover his debt from X?

6. Mr. A (transferor) transfer his share in a partnership firm to Mr. B (transferee). Mr. B is
         not entitled for few rights and privileges as Mr. A (transferor) is entitled therefor. Discuss
         in brief the points for which Mr. B is not entitled during continuance of partnership?

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                            4.53

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1.  (a)  2.      (d)  3.                           (c)  4.  (d)  5.  (a)   6.  (d)

7.  (d)  8.      (a)  9.                           (a) 10. (a) 11. (c) 12. (d)

13. (c) 14. (d) 15. (c)

Answers to the Descriptive Questions

1. Section 29 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 provides that a share in a partnership is
         transferable like any other property, but as the partnership relationship is based on
         mutual confidence, the assignee of a partner's interest by sale, mortgage or otherwise
         cannot enjoy the same rights and privileges as the original partner.

         The rights of such a transferee are as follows:

         (1) During the continuance of partnership, such transferee is not entitled

                   (a) to interfere with the conduct of the business,

                   (b) to require accounts, or

                   (c) to inspect books of the firm.

                   He is only entitled to receive the share of the profits of the transferring partner
                   and he is bound to accept the profits as agreed to by the partners, i.e., he
                   cannot challenge the accounts.

         (2) On the dissolution of the firm or on the retirement of the transferring partner,
                   the transferee will be entitled, against the remaining partners:

                   (a) to receive the share of the assets of the firm to which the transferring
                             partner was entitled, and

                   (b) for the purpose of ascertaining the share,

                   he is entitled to an account as from the date of the dissolution.

                   By virtue of Section 31, no person can be introduced as a partner in a firm
                   without the consent of all the partners. A partner cannot by transferring his own
                   interest, make anybody else a partner in his place, unless the other partners
                   agree to accept that person as a partner. At the same time, a partner is not
                   debarred from transferring his interest. A partner's interest in the partnership

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
         4.54  BUSINESS LAWS

   can be regarded as an existing interest and tangible property which can be
   assigned.

2. A minor cannot be bound by a contract because a minor's contract is void and not
         merely voidable. Therefore, a minor cannot become a partner in a firm because
         partnership is founded on a contract. Though a minor cannot be a partner in a firm, he
         can nonetheless be admitted to the benefits of partnership under Section 30 of the
         Act. In other words, he can be validly given a share in the partnership profits. When
         this has been done and it can be done with the consent of all the partners then the
         rights and liabilities of such a partner will be governed under Section 30 as follows:

Rights:

(i) A minor partner has a right to his agreed share of the profits and of the firm.

(ii) He can have access to, inspect and copy the accounts of the firm.

(iii) He can sue the partners for accounts or for payment of his share but only when
         severing his connection with the firm, and not otherwise.

(iv) On attaining majority he may within 6 months elect to become a partner or not
         to become a partner. If he elects to become a partner, then he is entitled to the
         share to which he was entitled as a minor. If he does not, then his share is not
         liable for any acts of the firm after the date of the public notice served to that
         effect.

3. Expulsion of a Partner (Section 33 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932):

A partner may not be expelled from a firm by a majority of partners except in exercise,
in good faith, of powers conferred by contract between the partners.

The test of good faith as required under Section 33(1) includes three things:

·  The expulsion must be in the interest of the partnership.

·  The partner to be expelled is served with a notice.

·  He is given an opportunity of being heard.

If a partner is otherwise expelled, the expulsion is null and void.

(i) Action by the partners of M/s XYZ & Associates, a partnership firm to expel Mr.
         G from the partnership was justified as he was expelled by united approval of
         the partners exercised in good faith to protect the interest of the partnership
         against the unauthorized activities charged against Mr. G. A proper notice and
         opportunity of being heard has to be given to Mr. G.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE INDIAN PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932                   4.55

         (ii) The following are the factors to be kept in mind prior expelling a partner from
                   the firm by other partners:

                   (a) the power of expulsion must have existed in a contract between the
                             partners;

                   (b) the power has been exercised by a majority of the partners; and

                   (c) it has been exercised in good faith.

4. Section 37 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 provides that where a partner dies or
         otherwise ceases to be a partner and there is no final settlement of account between
         the legal representatives of the deceased partner or the firms with the property of the
         firm, then, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, the legal representatives of the
         deceased partner or the retired partner are entitled to claim either.

         (1) Such shares of the profits earned after the death or retirement of the partner
                   which is attributable to the use of his share in the property of the firm; or

         (2) Interest at the rate of 6 per cent annum on the amount of his share in the
                   property.

         Based on the aforesaid provisions of Section 37 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, in
         the given problem, A's Legal representatives shall be entitled, at their option to:

         (a) the 20% shares of profits (as per the partnership deed); or

         (b) interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum on the amount of A's share in the
                   property.

5. As per the provisions of Section 30(5) of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, at any time
         within six months of his attaining majority, or of his obtaining knowledge that he had
         been admitted to the benefits of partnership, whichever date is later, such person may
         give public notice that he has elected to become or that he has elected not to become
         a partner in the firm, and such notice shall determine his position as regards the firm.

         However, if he fails to give such notice, he shall become a partner in the firm on the
         expiry of the said six months.

         If the minor becomes a partner by his failure to give the public notice within specified
         time, his rights and liabilities as given in Section 30(7) are as follows:

         (A) He becomes personally liable to third parties for all acts of the firm done since
                   he was admitted to the benefits of partnership.

         (B) His share in the property and the profits of the firm remains the same to which
                   he was entitled as a minor.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   4.56  BUSINESS LAWS

   (i) In the instant case, since, X has failed to give a public notice, he shall
            become a partner in the M/s ABC & Co. and becomes personally liable
            to Mr. L, a third party.

   (ii) In the light of the provisions of Section 30(7) read with Section 30(5)
            of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, since X has failed to give public
            notice that he has not elected to not to become a partner within six
            months, he will be deemed to be a partner after the period of the above
            six months and therefore, Mr. L can recover his debt from him also in
            the same way as he can recover from any other partner.

6. As per Section 29 of Indian Partnership Act, 1932, a transfer by a partner of his interest
         in the firm, either absolute or by mortgage, or by the creation by him of a charge on
         such interest, does not entitle the transferee, during the continuance of the firm, to
         interfere in the conduct of business, or to require accounts, or to inspect the books of
         the firm, but entitles the transferee only to receive the share of profits of the
         transferring partner, and the transferee shall accept the account of profits agreed to
         by the partners.

In the given case during the continuance of partnership, such transferee Mr. B is not
entitled:

·  to interfere with the conduct of the business.

·  to require accounts.

·  to inspect books of the firm.

However, Mr. B is only entitled to receive the share of the profits of the transferring
partner and he is bound to accept the profits as agreed to by the partners, i.e. he
cannot challenge the accounts.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
