CHAPTER                  5

THE LIMITED LIABILITY
PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008

                                        LEARNING OUTCOMES

After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand-
 The meaning of the term `Limited Liability Partnership', its need,

       scope and advantages
 About Incorporation of LLP
 Differences between `Limited Liability Partnership' and other forms

       of organisation

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

                                                   LLP

Introduction                                                        Incorporation  Difference with
                                                                                   other forms of
              Essential                            Characteristics                  organizations
              features                                  of LLP

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.2  BUSINESS LAWS

      INTRODUCTION

The Ministry of Law and Justice on 9th January 2007 notified the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008.

The Parliament passed the Limited Liability Partnership Bill on 12th December, 2008 and the
President of India has assented the Bill on 7th January, 2009 and called as the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008.

The LLP Act, 2008 is applicable to the whole of India.

This Act have been enacted to make provisions for the formation and regulation of Limited
Liability Partnerships and for matters connected there with or incidental thereto.

The LLP Act, 2008 has 81 sections and 4 schedules.

The First Schedule deals with mutual rights and duties of partners, as well limited liability
partnership and its partners where there is absence of a formal agreement with respect to
them.

The Second Schedule deals with conversion of a firm into LLP.

The Third Schedule deals with conversion of a private company into LLP.

The Fourth Schedule deals with conversion of unlisted public company into LLP.

The Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the Registrar of Companies (ROC) are entrusted with
the task of administrating the LLP Act, 2008. The Central Government has the authority to
frame the Rules with regard to the LLP Act, 2008, and can amend them by notifications in
the Official Gazette, from time to time.

It is also to be noted that the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 is not applicable to LLPs.

The Limited Liability Act, 2008 has been amended through the Limited Liability
Partnership (Amendment) Act, 2021 dated 13th August, 2021.

Need of new form of Limited Liability Partnership

The lawmakers envisaged the need for bringing out a new legislation for creation of the
Limited Liability Partnership to meet with the contemporary growth of the Indian economy.
A need has been felt for a new corporate form that would provide
an alternative to the traditional partnership with unlimited personal
liability on the one hand and the statute-based governance
structure of the limited liability company on the other hand. In
order to enable professional expertise and entrepreneurial
initiative and combine, organize and operate in flexible, innovative and efficient manner, the
LLP Act, 2008 was enacted.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008                           5.3

Thus, LLP as a form of business organization is an alternative corporate business vehicle. It
provides the benefits of limited liability but allows its members the flexibility of organizing
their internal structure as a partnership based on a mutually arrived agreement. The LLP
form enables entrepreneurs, professionals and enterprises providing services of any kind or
engaged in scientific and technical disciplines, to form commercially efficient vehicles suited
to their requirements. Owing to flexibility in its structure and operation, the LLP is a suitable
vehicle for small enterprises and for investment by venture capital.

    1. LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP- MEANING

             AND CONCEPT

Meaning: A LLP is a new form of legal business entity with limited liability.
It is an alternative corporate business vehicle that not only gives the
benefits of limited liability at low compliance cost but allows its partners
the flexibility of organising their internal structure as a traditional
partnership. The LLP is a separate legal entity and, while the LLP itself will
be liable for the full extent of its assets, the liability of the partners will be limited.

LLP as a separate legal entity and business organisation is an alternative corporate business
form that gives the benefits of limited liability of a company and the flexibility of a partnership.

Since LLP contains elements of both `a corporate structure' as well as `a partnership firm
structure' LLP is called a hybrid between a company and a partnership.

                                                    New form of
                                                   legal business

                                                     entity with
                                                   limited liability

Liability of the                                   LLP                   Alternative
partners will be                                                          corporate
                                                                      business vehicle
     limited

LLP itself will be                                      Allow the partners
liable for the full                                      the flexibility of
                                                         organising their
   extent of its                                        internal structure
      assets

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              5.4           BUSINESS LAWS

Important Definitions

1.  Body Corporate [(Section 2(1)(d)]: It means a company as defined in clause (20) of

    section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 and includes

    (i) a limited liability partnership registered under this Act;

    (ii) a limited liability partnership incorporated outside India; and

    (iii) a company incorporated outside India,

    but does not include

    (i) a corporation sole;

    (ii) a co-operative society registered under any law for the time being in force;
             and

    (iii) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined in clause (20) of
             section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 or a limited liability partnership as
             defined in this Act), which the Central Government may, by notification in the
             Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.

2.  Business [Section 2(1)(e)]: "Business" includes every trade, profession, service and

    occupation except any activity which the Central Government may, by notification,

    exclude.

3.  Designated Partner [Section 2(1)(j)]: "Designated partner" means any partner

    designated as such pursuant to section 7.

4.  Entity [Section 2(1)(k)]: "Entity" means any body corporate and includes, for the

    purposes of sections 18, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52 and 53, a firm setup under the Indian

    Partnership Act, 1932.

5.  Financial Year [Section 2(1)(l)]: "Financial year", in relation to a LLP, means the

    period from the 1st day of April of a year to the 31st day of March of the following

    year.

    However, in the case of a LLP incorporated after the 30th day of September of a year,
    the financial year may end on the 31st day of March of the year next following that
    year.

    Example 1: If a LLP has been incorporated on 15th October, 2019, then its financial
    year may be from 15th October, 2019 to 31st March, 2021.

    The Income Tax department has prescribed uniform financial year from 1st April to
    31st March of next year. In keeping with the Income tax law, the financial year for LLP
    should always be from 1st April to 31st March each year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008          5.5

6.  Foreign LLP [section 2(1)(m)]: It means a LLP formed, incorporated or registered

    outside India which establishes a place of business within India.

7.  Limited liability partnership [Section 2(1)(n)]: Limited Liability Partnership means

    a partnership formed and registered under this Act.

8.  Limited Liability partnership agreement [Section 2(1)(o)]: It means any written

    agreement between the partners of the LLP or between the LLP and its partners

    which determines the mutual rights and duties of the partners and their rights and

    duties in relation to that LLP.

9.  Partner [Section 2(1)(q)]: Partner, in relation to a LLP, means any person who

    becomes a partner in the LLP in accordance with the LLP agreement.

10. Small Limited Liability Partnership [Section 2(1)(ta)]: It means a limited liability
         partnership--

    (i) the contribution of which, does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees or such
             higher amount, not exceeding five crore rupees, as may be prescribed; and

    (ii) the turnover of which, as per the Statement of Accounts and Solvency for the
             immediately preceding financial year, does not exceed forty lakh rupees or
             such higher amount, not exceeding fifty crore rupees, as may be prescribed;
             or

    (iii) which meets such other requirements as may be prescribed, and fulfils such
             terms and conditions as may be prescribed.

Non-applicability of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (Section 4): Save as otherwise
provided, the provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 shall not apply to a LLP.

Partners (Section 5): Any individual or body corporate may be a partner in a LLP. However,
an individual shall not be capable of becoming a partner of a LLP, if--

(a) he has been found to be of unsound mind by a Court of competent jurisdiction and
         the finding is in force;

(b) he is an undischarged insolvent; or

(c) he has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is pending.

Minimum number of partners (Section 6):

(i) Every LLP shall have at least two partners.

(ii) If at any time the number of partners of a LLP is reduced below two and the LLP
         carries on business for more than six months while the number is so reduced, the
         person, who is the only partner of the LLP during the time that it so carries on

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.6             BUSINESS LAWS

         business after those six months and has the knowledge of the fact that it is carrying
         on business with him alone, shall be liable personally for the obligations of the LLP
         incurred during that period.

Designated partners (Section 7):

(i) Every LLP shall have at least two designated partners who are individuals and at least
         one of them shall be a resident in India.

(ii) If in LLP, all the partners are bodies corporate or in which one or more partners are
         individuals and bodies corporate, at least two individuals who are partners of such
         LLP or nominees of such bodies corporate shall act as designated partners.

(iii) Resident in India: For the purposes of this section, the term resident in India means a
         person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 120 days during the
         financial year.

         Example 2: There is an LLP by the name Indian Helicopters LLP having 5 partners
         namely Mr. A (Non resident), Mr. B (Non Resident) Ms. C (resident), Ms. D (resident)
         and Ms. E (resident). In this case, at least 2 should be named as Designated Partner
         out of which 1 should be resident. Hence, if Mr. A and Mr. B are designated then it
         will not serve the purpose. One of the designated partners should be there out of Ms.
         C, Ms. D and Ms. E.

2. CHARACTERISTIC OF LLP

Body Corporate  Perpetual                          Separate legal  Mutual Agency
                Succession                              entity

LLP Agreement   Artificial Legal                   Common Seal     Limited liability
                     person                                         Investigation
                                                                    Foreign LLPs
Management of       Minimum and                    Business for
     business   maximum number of                   profit only

                        partners

Compromise or   Conversion into LLP                E-filing of
 Arrangement                                       documents

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008    5.7

1.  LLP is a body corporate: Section 2(1)(d) of the LLP Act, 2008 provides that a LLP is a

    body corporate formed and incorporated under this Act and is a legal entity separate

    from that of its partners and shall have perpetual succession. Therefore, any change

    in the partners of a LLP shall not affect the existence, rights or liabilities of the LLP.

    Section 3 of LLP Act provides that a LLP is a body corporate formed and incorporated
    under this Act and is a legal entity separate from that of its partners.

2.  Perpetual Succession: The LLP can continue its existence irrespective of changes in

    partners. Death, insanity, retirement or insolvency of partners has no impact on the

    existence of LLP. It is capable of entering into contracts and holding property in its

    own name.

3.  Separate Legal Entity: The LLP as a separate legal entity, is liable to the full extent of

    its assets but liability of the partners is limited to their agreed contribution in the LLP.

    In other words, creditors of LLP shall be the creditors of LLP alone.

4.  Mutual Agency: No partner is liable on account of the independent or un-

    authorized actions of other partners, thus individual partners are shielded from joint

    liability created by another partner's wrongful business decisions or misconduct. In

    other words, all partners will be the agents of the LLP alone. No one partner can

    bind the other partner by his acts.

5.  LLP Agreement: Mutual rights and duties of the partners within a LLP are governed

    by an agreement between the partners. The LLP Act, 2008 provides flexibility to

    partner to devise the agreement as per their choice. In the absence of any such

    agreement, the mutual rights and duties shall be governed by the provisions of the

    LLP Act, 2008.

6.  Artificial Legal Person: A LLP is an artificial legal person because it is created by a

    legal process and is clothed with all rights of an individual. It can do everything

    which any natural person can do, except of course that, it cannot be sent to jail,

    cannot take an oath, cannot marry or get divorce nor can it practice a learned

    profession like CA or Medicine. A LLP is invisible, intangible, immortal (it can be

    dissolved by law alone) but not fictitious because it really exists.

7.  Common Seal: A LLP being an artificial person can act through its partners and

    designated partners. LLP may have a common seal, if it decides to have one [Section

    14(c)]. Thus, it is not mandatory for a LLP to have a common seal. It shall remain

    under the custody of some responsible official and it shall be affixed in the presence

    of at least 2 designated partners of the LLP.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
    5.8           BUSINESS LAWS

8.  Limited Liability: Every partner of a LLP is, for the purpose of the business of LLP,

    the agent of the LLP, but not of other partners. The liability of the partners will be

    limited to their agreed contribution in the LLP. Such contribution may be of tangible

    or intangible nature or both.

    Example 3: The professionals like Engineering consultants, Legal Advisors and
    Accounting Professional are afraid of entering into business due to unlimited liability.
    Hence the LLP partnership Act provides an avenue for these professionals to Limited
    Liability Partnership firms which restricts their liability to the agreed amount. This has
    encouraged Professionals to form LLP.

9.  Management of Business: The partners in the LLP are entitled to manage the

    business of LLP. But only the designated partners are responsible for legal

    compliances.

10. Minimum and Maximum number of Partners: Every LLP shall have least two
         partners and shall also have at least 2 individuals as designated partners, of whom at
         least one shall be resident in India. There is no maximum limit on the partners in LLP.

11. Business for Profit Only: The essential requirement for forming LLP
         is carrying on a lawful business with a view to earn profit. Thus, LLP
         cannot be formed for charitable or non-economic purpose.

12. Investigation: The Central Government shall have powers to investigate the affairs of
         an LLP by appointment of competence authority for the purpose.

13. Compromise or Arrangement: Any compromise or agreements including merger
         and amalgamation of LLPs shall be in accordance with the provisions of the LLP Act,
         2008.

14. Conversion into LLP: A firm, private company or an unlisted public company would
         be allowed to be converted into LLP in accordance with the provisions of LLP Act,
         2008.

15. E-Filling of Documents: Every form or application of document required to be filed
         or delivered under the act and rules made thereunder, shall be filed in computer
         readable electronic form on its website www.mca.gov.in and authenticated by a
         partner or designated partner of LLP by the use of electronic or digital signature.

16. Foreign LLPs: Section 2(1)(m) defines foreign limited liability partnership "as a
         limited liability partnership formed, incorporated, or registered outside India which
         established as place of business within India". Foreign LLP can become a partner in
         an Indian LLP.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008        5.9

Advantages of LLP form- LLP form is a form of business model which:
          is organized and operates on the basis of an agreement
          provides flexibility without imposing detailed legal and procedural
          requirements.
          Easy to form

          All partners enjoy limited liability

          Flexible capital structure

          Easy to dissolve

3. INCORPORATION OF LLP

Incorporation document (Section 11): The most important document needed for
registration is the incorporation document.

(1) For a LLP to be incorporated:

(a) two or more persons associated for carrying on a lawful business with a view
         to profit shall subscribe their names to an incorporation document;

(b) the incorporation document shall be filed in such manner and with such fees,
         as may be prescribed with the Registrar of the State in which the registered
         office of the LLP is to be situated; and

(c) Statement to be filed:

  there shall be filed along with the incorporation document, a

  statement in the prescribed form,

  made by either an advocate, or a Company Secretary or a Chartered

  Accountant or a Cost Accountant, who is engaged in the formation of

  the LLP and

  by any one who subscribed his name to the incorporation document,

  that all the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder

  have been complied with,

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.10            BUSINESS LAWS

      in respect of incorporation and matters precedent and incidental

      thereto.

(2) The incorporation document shall--

(a) be in a form as may be prescribed;

(b) state the name of the LLP;

(c) state the proposed business of the LLP;

(d) state the address of the registered office of the LLP;

(e) state the name and address of each of the persons who are to be partners of
         the LLP on incorporation;

(f) state the name and address of the persons who are to be designated partners
         of the LLP on incorporation;

(g) contain such other information concerning the proposed LLP as may be
         prescribed.

(3) If a person makes a statement as discussed above which he--

(a) knows to be false; or

(b) does not believe to be true, shall be punishable

      with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 2 years and

      with fine which shall not be less than ` 10,000 but which may extend to

      ` 5 Lakhs.

Incorporation by registration (Section 12):

(1) When the requirements imposed by clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section
         11 have been complied with, the Registrar shall retain the incorporation document
         and, unless the requirement imposed by clause (a) of that sub-section has not been
         complied with, he shall, within a period of 14 days--

         (a) register the incorporation document; and

         (b) give a certificate that the LLP is incorporated by the name specified therein.

(2) The Registrar may accept the statement delivered under clause (c) of sub-section (1)
         of section 11 as sufficient evidence that the requirement imposed by clause (a) of
         that sub-section has been complied with.

(3) The certificate issued under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be signed by the
         Registrar and authenticated by his official seal.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008                         5.11

(4) The certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the LLP is incorporated by the name
         specified therein.

Registered office of LLP and change therein (Section 13):

(1) Every LLP shall have a registered office to which all communications and notices may
         be addressed and where they shall be received.

(2) A document may be served on a LLP or a partner or designated partner thereof by
         sending it by post under a certificate of posting or by registered post or by any other
         manner, as may be prescribed, at the registered office and any other address specifically
         declared by the LLP for the purpose in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

(3) A LLP may change the place of its registered office and file the notice of such change
         with the Registrar in such form and manner and subject to such conditions as may be
         prescribed and any such change shall take effect only upon such filing.

(4) If the LLP contravenes any provisions of this section, the LLP and its
         every partner shall be liable to a penalty of ` 500 for each day during which the
         default continues, subject to a maximum of ` 50,000 for the LLP and its every partner.

Effect of registration (Section 14):

                                                   Suing and being
                                                          sued;

 doing and suffering     On rgisteration a                            acquiring, owning,
 such other acts and      LLP shall, by its                               holding and
                         name, be capable                                developing or
   things as bodies
    corporate may                  of                               disposing of property,
lawfully do and suffer.                                              whether movable or
                                                                     immovable, tangible

                                                                         or intangible;

                             having a
                         common seal, if

                           it decides to
                          have one; and

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.12  BUSINESS LAWS

Name (Section 15):

(1) Every limited liability partnership shall have either the words "limited liability
         partnership" or the acronym "LLP" as the last words of its name.

(2) No LLP shall be registered by a name which, in the opinion of the Central
         Government is--

         (a) undesirable; or

         (b) identical or too nearly resembles to that of any other LLP or a company or a
                   registered trade mark of any other person under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.

Reservation of name (Section 16):

(1) A person may apply in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as may
         be prescribed to the Registrar for the reservation of a name set out in the application
         as--

         (a) the name of a proposed LLP; or

         (b) the name to which a LLP proposes to change its name.

(2) Upon receipt of an application under sub-section (1) and on payment of the
         prescribed fee, the Registrar may, if he is satisfied, subject to the rules prescribed by
         the Central Government in the matter, that the name to be reserved is not one which
         may be rejected on any ground referred to in sub-section (2) of section 15, reserve
         the name for a period of 3 months from the date of intimation by the Registrar.

Change of name of LLP (Section 17):

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 15 and 16, if through inadvertence
         or otherwise, a LLP, on its first registration or on its registration by a new body
         corporate, its registered name, is registered by a name which is identical with or too
         nearly resembles to --

         (a) that of any other LLP or a company; or

         (b) a registered trade mark of a proprietor under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, as is
                   likely to be mistaken for it,

         then on an application of such LLP or proprietor referred to in clauses (a) and (b)
         respectively or a company,

         the Central Government may direct that such LLP to change its name or new name
         within a period of 3 months from the date of issue of such direction.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008                        5.13

         It is further provided that an application of the proprietor of the registered trade
         marks shall be maintainable within a period of 3 years from the date of incorporation
         or registration or change of name of the LLP under this Act.

(2) Where a LLP changes its name or obtains a new name under sub-section (1), it shall
         within a period of 15 days from the date of such change, give notice of the change to
         Registrar along with the order of the Central Government, who shall carry out
         necessary changes in the certificate of incorporation and within 30 days of such
         change in the certificate of incorporation, such LLP shall change its name in the LLP
         agreement.

(3) If the LLP is in default in complying with any direction given under sub-section (1),
         the Central Government shall allot a new name to the LLP in such manner as may be
         prescribed and the Registrar shall enter the new name in the register of LLP in place
         of the old name and issue a fresh certificate of incorporation with new name, which
         the LLP shall use thereafter.

         Nothing contained in this sub-section shall prevent a LLP from subsequently
         changing its name in accordance with the provisions of section 16.

4. DIFFERENCES WITH OTHER FORMS OF
         ORGANISATION

Distinction between LLP and Partnership Firm: The points of distinction between a limited
liability partnership and partnership firm are tabulated as follows:

Basis                                              LLP             Partnership firm

1. Regulating Act  The                             Limited  Liability The Indian Partnership Act,

                   Partnership Act, 2008.                   1932.

2. Body corporate  It is a body corporate.                  It is not a body corporate.

3. Separate legal entity It is a legal entity separate It is a group of persons with

                   from its members.                        no separate legal entity.

4. Creation        It is created by a legal process It is created by an agreement
                   called registration under the between the partners.
                   LLP Act, 2008.

5. Registration    Registration is mandatory. Registration is voluntary. Only

                   LLP can sue and be sued in its the registered partnership

                   own name.                                firm can sue the third parties.

6. Perpetual succession The death, insanity, retirement The death, insanity, retirement
                                       or insolvency of the partner(s) or insolvency of the partner(s)

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
              5.14       BUSINESS LAWS

                         does not affect its existence   may affect its existence. It has
                         of LLP. Partners may join or    no perpetual succession.
                         leave but its existence
                         continues forever.

7. Name                  Name of the LLP to contain No guidelines. The partners

                         the word limited liability can have any name as per

                         partnership (LLP) as suffix.    their choice.

8. Liability             Liability of each partner is    Liability of each partner is
                         limited to the extent to        unlimited. It can be extended
                         agreed contribution except in   upto the personal assets of
                         case of willful fraud.          the partners.

9. Mutual agency         Each partner can bind the LLP Each partner can bind the firm

                         by his own acts but not the as well as other partners by

                         other partners.                 his own acts.

10. Designated partners  At least two designated         There is no provision for such
                         partners and atleast one of
                         them shall be resident in       partners       under    the
                         India.
                                                         Partnership Act, 1932.

11. Common seal          It may have its common seal There is no such concept in

                         as its official signatures.     partnership.

12. Legal compliances    Only designated partners are    All partners are responsible
                         responsible for all the         for all the compliances and
                         compliances and penalties       penalties under the Act.
                         under this Act.

13. Annual filing      of LLP is required to file:       Partnership firm is not
       documents
                         (i) Annual statement of required to file any annual

                         accounts                        document with the registrar

                         (ii) Statement of solvency      of firms.

                         (iii) Annual return with the
                              registration of LLP every
                              year.

14. Foreign partnership  Foreign nationals can become Foreign nationals cannot

                         a partner in a LLP.             become a partner in a

                                                         partnership firm.

15. Minor as partner     Minor cannot be admitted to     Minor can be admitted to the
                         the benefits of LLP.            benefits of the partnership
                                                         with the prior consent of the
                                                         existing partners.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008            5.15

Distinction between LLP and Limited Liability Company

Basis                LLP                               Limited Liability Company

1. Regulating Act    The LLP Act, 2008.                The Companies Act, 2013.

2. Members/Partners  The persons who contribute        The persons who invest the
                     to LLP are known as partners      money in the shares are
                     of the LLP.                       known as members of the
                                                       company.

3. Internal governance The internal governance The internal governance

structure            structure of a LLP is governed structure of a company is

                     by contract agreement regulated by statute (i.e.,

                     between the partners.             Companies Act, 2013).

4. Name              Name of the LLP to contain        Name of the public company
                     the word "Limited Liability       to contain the word "limited"
                     partnership" or "LLP" as suffix.  and Pvt. Co. to contain the
                                                       word "Private limited" as
                                                       suffix.

5. No.               of Minimum ­ 2 partners           Private company:

members/partners Maximum ­ No such limit on Minimum ­ 2 members

                     the partners in the Act. The Maximum 200 members

                     partners of the LLP can be        Public company:
                     individuals/or body corporate     Minimum ­ 7 members
                     through the nominees.             Maximum ­ No such limit on

                                                       the members.

                                                       Members       can          be

                                                       organizations, trusts, another

                                                       business form or individuals.

6. Liability         of Liability of a partners is Liability of a member is

members/partners limited to the extent of limited to the amount unpaid

                     agreed contribution except in on the shares held by them.

                     case of willful fraud.

7. Management        The business of the company       The affairs of the company are
                     is managed by the partners        managed by board of
                     including the designated          directors elected by the
                     partners authorized in the        shareholders.
                     agreement.

8. Minimum number of Minimum 2 designated Pvt. Co. ­ 2 directors

directors/designated partners.                         Public co. ­ 3 directors
partners

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
  5.16            BUSINESS LAWS

SUMMARY

A LLP is a special type of partnership that can be used as business organizations owned by
certain type of professionals such as Company Secretaries, Chartered Accountants, Cost
Accountants, Lawyers, Engineers, Doctors, and Consultants etc., who are not allowed to use
corporation form of entity to limit their liability. LLP is generally set up for carrying on a
partnership consisting of partners carrying on practice in one or more eligible professions,
etc.

Since India has witnessed considerable growth in services sector and the quality of our
professionals have been acknowledged internationally. It was necessary that
entrepreneurship knowledge and risk capital combine to provide a further momentum to
our impressive economic growth. It is likely that in the years to come Indian professionals
would be providing accountancy, legal and various other professional/technical services to a
large number of entities across the globe. Such services would require multidisciplinary
combinations that would offer a menu of solutions to international clients. In view of all this,
the concept of LLP came into existence. LLP framework could be used for many enterprises,
such as:-

  Persons providing services of any kind

  Enterprises in new knowledge and technology based fields where the corporate form

  is not suited.

  For professionals such as Chartered Accountants (CA), Cost and Management

  Accountants (CMA), Company Secretaries (CS) and Advocates, etc.

  Venture capital funds where risk capital combines with knowledge and expertise.

  Professionals and enterprises engaged in any scientific, technical or artistic discipline,

  for any activity relating to research production, design and provision of services.

  Small Sector Enterprises

  Producer Companies in Handloom, Handicrafts sector.

LLP has partners but no directors or shareholders. The major constituents of a LLP are its
partners who are the ultimate owners.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008                                          5.17

                                 The LLP Act, 2008

Applicability      Contents: 81 sections           Non-                       Meaning and Concept
                   and 4 schedules                 Applicability              of LLP
From      31st
                   First Schedule- mutual          Non-                       1. New form of legal
March, 2009        rights & duties of              Applicability              business entity with
                   partners,                       of the Indian              limited liability
(Extends                                           Partnership                2. Alternative corporate
                   Second Schedule -               Act, 1932 to               business vehicle
whole     of       conversion of a firm into       LLPs.                      3. Allows the partners
                   LLP,                                                       the flexibility of
India)                                                                        organising their internal
                                                                              structure
                   Third Schedule -                                           4. LLP itself will be liable
                   conversion of a Pvt. Co.                                   for the full extent of its
                   into LLP,                                                  assets
                                                                              5. Liability of the
                   Fourth        Schedule-                                    partners will be limited

                   conversion of unlisted

                   public company into LLP.

                                                   Important Definitions

Body Corporate     Business      Designated         Entity     Foreign LLP    Financial Year           LLP
 [Sec. 2(1)(d)]                    Partner           [Sec.         [Sec.      [Sec. 2(1)(l)]:     agreement
                     [Sec.                         2(1)(k)]                                      [Sec. 2(1)(o)]
                   2(1)(e)]       [S 2(1)(j)]                    2(1)(m)]

A company &        Includes:                                   LLP formed,    1st April to 31st  Written
                   every trade,                                               March.             agreement
includes - LLP,    profession,   Any               Any body    incorporated                      b/w partners
                   service &     partner           corporate                                     of LLP or
foreign   LLP,     occupation    designated        &           or registered  If          LLP    between the
                                 as such           includes a                                    LLP and its
foreign            Excludes:     pursuant          partnershi  outside India  incorporated       partners.
                   Any activity  to section        p firm for
company,           notified by   7.                specific    which          after  30th
                   CG.                             purposes.
Not include ­                                                  establishes a  September,
corporation sole;
co-operative                                                   place      of  F.Y. may end
society & any
other notified by                                              business       on 31st day of
CG.
                                                               within India.  March of next

                                                                              following that

                                                                              year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
           5.18           BUSINESS LAWS
                                     PARTNERS

    Who may be (Sec. 5) :                          Minimum partners (Section 6)
    Any individual or body corporate               1. Two partners.
    may be a partner in a LLP. But                 2. If LLP carries on business for
    not, person of unsound mind,                   more than 6 months with only one
    undischarged insolvent; or who                 partner, he shall be liable
    has applied to be adjudicated as               personally for the obligations of
    an insolvent.                                  the LLP incurred during that
                                                   period.

                          Important Concepts

    Small LLP             Designated partners (S.7)  Incorporation of LLP
     [S.2(ta)]

Contribution upto         1. At least two          1. Subscription of Names by two or
                          designated               more persons,
Rs.25L;                   partners who are         2. Filing of Documents with ROC with
                          individuals and at       prescribed fees.
&                         least one of them        3. Compliance Statement made by
                          shall be a resident      advocate/CS/CA/CWA & by any one of
Turnover         for      in India.                subscribers.
                          2. Resident in           4. Documents containing - Name,
immediately               India: a person          Proposed business, Address of LLP;
                          who has stayed in        Name and address of each of to be
preceding        F.Y.     India for a period of    partners & designated partners; Other
                          not less than 120        prescribed information.
upto Rs.40 L              days during the          5. Issue of Incorporation Certificate by
                          immediately              ROC within 14 days
or                        preceding one year.

which           fulfills

prescribed terms

and conditions.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008             5.19

                           Important Concepts

         Name              Change of Name                               Characteristics

1. Use of words            If name of                   1. Body Corporate
                                                        2. Perpetual Succession
"limited liability         registered LLP is            3. Separate legal entity
                                                        4. Mutual Agency
partnership"        or     identical or too             5. LLP Agreement
                                                        6. Artificial Legal person
"LLP" as the last          nearly resembles             7. Common Seal
                                                        8. Limited liability
words of its name.         to any other                 9. Management of business
                                                        10. Minimum and maximum number
2. No LLP registration     partnership firm
                                                            of partners
by a name which, in        or LLP or                    11. Business for profit only
                                                        12. Investigation
the opinion of the         company or a                 13. Compromise or Arrangement
                                                        14. Conversion into LLP
CG is--                    registered trade             15. E-Filing of documents
                                                        16. Foreign LLPs
a) undesirable; or         mark, CG may

b) identical or too        direct such LLP

nearly resembles to        to change its

any other partnership      name within 3

firm or LLP or             months.                 (On

company or a               Application)

registered          trade

mark.

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Ministry of Corporate Affairs enforced the LLP Act, with effect from-
         (a) 31st March, 2008
         (b) 1st April 2008
         (c) 31st March, 2009
         (d) 1st April 2009

2. Whether partnership law applies to the LLP-
         (a) Yes
         (b) No

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.20  BUSINESS LAWS

3. State which of the statement is correct under the Limited Liability Partnership Act,
         2008-
         (a) All partners have unlimited liability
         (b) All partners have limited liability

4. Which of the following cannot be converted into LLP?
         (a) Partnership firm
         (b) Private company
         (c) Listed company
         (d) unlisted company

5. The approved name of LLP shall be valid for a period of ___ from the date of approval:
         (a) 1 Month
         (b) 2 Months
         (c) 3 months
         (d) 6 months

6. Name of the Limited Liability Partnership shall be ended by:
         (a) Limited
         (b) Limited Liability partnership or LLP
         (c) Private Limited
         (d) OPC

7. Which one of the following statements about limited liability partnerships (LLPs) is
         incorrect?
         (a) An LLP has a legal personality separate from that of its members.
         (b) The liability of each partner in an LLP is limited.
         (c) Members of an LLP are taxed as partners.
         (d) A listed company can convert to an LLP.

8. For the purpose of LLP, Resident in India means:
         (a) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 182 days during the
                   current year.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008                        5.21

         (b) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 180 days during the
                   immediately preceding one year.

         (c) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 181 days during the
                   immediately preceding one year.

         (d) Person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 120 days during the
                   financial year.

Descriptive Questions

1. Examine the concept of LLP.
2. Enumerate the various characteristics of the LLP.
3. What do you mean by Designated Partner? Whether it is mandatory to appoint

         Designated partner in a LLP?
4. What are the effects of registration of LLP?
5. "LLP is an alternative corporate business form that gives the benefits of limited liability

         of a company and the flexibility of a partnership". Explain.
6. Explain the essential elements to incorporate a Limited Liability Partnership under the

         LLP Act, 2008.

ANSWERS/HINTS

Answers to MCQs

1  (c)  2        (b)  3                            (b)  4  (c)  5  (c)   6  (b)

7  (d)  8        (d)

Answer to the Descriptive Question

    1. Meaning ­ A LLP is a new form of legal business entity with limited liability. It is
              an alternative corporate business vehicle that gives the benefits of limited liability
              but allows its partners the flexibility of organising their internal structure as a
              traditional partnership. The LLP is a separate legal entity and, while the LLP itself
              will be liable for the full extent of its assets, the liability of the partners will be
              limited.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
   5.22               BUSINESS LAWS

Concept of "limited liability partnership"

·  The LLP can continue its existence irrespective of changes in partners. It is

   capable of entering into contracts and holding property in its own name.

·  The LLP is a separate legal entity, is liable to the full extent of its assets but

   liability of the partners is limited to their agreed contribution in the LLP.

·  Further, no partner is liable on account of the independent or un-authorized

   actions of other partners, thus individual partners are shielded from joint

   liability created by another partner's wrongful business decisions or

   misconduct.

·  Mutual rights and duties of the partners within a LLP are governed by an

   agreement between the partners or between the partners and the LLP as the

   case may be. The LLP, however, is not relieved of the liability for its other

   obligations as a separate entity.

·  LLP is an alternative corporate business form that gives the benefits of limited

   liability of a company and the flexibility of a partnership.

Since LLP contains elements of both `a corporate structure' as well as `a partnership
firm structure' LLP is called a hybrid between a company and a partnership.

2. LLP registered with the Registrar under the LLP Act, 2008 has the following
         characteristics:

·  Body Corporate

·  Perpetual Succession

·  Separate legal entity

·  Mutual Agency

·  LLP Agreement

·  Artificial Legal person

·  Common Seal

·  Limited liability

·  Management of business

·  Minimum and maximum number of partners

·  Business for profit only

·  Investigation

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008                 5.23

·  Compromise or Arrangement

·  Conversion into LLP

·  E-filing of documents

·  Foreign

3. Designated Partner [Section 2(j)]: "Designated partner" means any partner
         designated as such pursuant to section 7.

According to section 7 of the LLP Act, 2008:

(i) Every LLP shall have at least two designated partners who are individuals and
         at least one of them shall be a resident in India.

(ii) If in LLP, all the partners are bodies corporate or in which one or more
         partners are individuals and bodies corporate, at least two individuals who are
         partners of such LLP or nominees of such bodies corporate shall act as
         designated partners.

(iii) Resident in India: For the purposes of this section, the term "resident in India"
         means a person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 120 days
         during the financial year.

4. Effect of registration (Section 14):

On registration, a LLP shall, by its name, be capable of--

(a) suing and being sued;

(b) acquiring, owning, holding and developing or disposing of property, whether
         movable or immovable, tangible or intangible;

(c) having a common seal, if it decides to have one; and

(d) doing and suffering such other acts and things as bodies corporate may
         lawfully do and suffer.

5. LLP is an alternative corporate business form that gives the benefits of limited
         liability of a company and the flexibility of a partnership

Limited Liability: Every partner of a LLP is, for the purpose of the business of LLP,
the agent of the LLP, but not of other partners. The liability of the partners will be
limited to their agreed contribution in the LLP, while the LLP itself will be liable for
the full extent of its assets.

Flexibility of a partnership: The LLP allows its members the flexibility of organizing
their internal structure as a partnership based on a mutually arrived agreement. The

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.24  BUSINESS LAWS

         LLP form enables entrepreneurs, professionals and enterprises providing services of
         any kind or engaged in scientific and technical disciplines, to form commercially
         efficient vehicles suited to their requirements. Owing to flexibility in its structure and
         operation, the LLP is a suitable vehicle for small enterprises and for investment by
         venture capital.

6. Essential elements to incorporate Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) - Under the
         LLP Act, 2008, the following elements are very essential to form a LLP in India:

         (i) To complete and submit incorporation document in the form prescribed with
                   the Registrar electronically;

         (ii) To have at least two partners for incorporation of LLP [Individual or body
                   corporate];

         (iii) To have registered office in India to which all communications will be made
                   and received;

         (iv) To appoint minimum two individuals as designated partners who will be
                   responsible for number of duties including doing of all acts, matters and
                   things as are required to be done by the LLP. Atleast one of them should be
                   resident in India.

         (v) A person or nominee of body corporate intending to be appointed as
                   designated partner of LLP should hold a Designated Partner Identification
                   Number (DPIN) allotted by Ministry of Corporate Affairs.

         (vi) To execute a partnership agreement between the partners inter se or between
                   the LLP and its partners. In the absence of any agreement the provisions as
                   set out in First Schedule of LLP Act, 2008 will be applied.

         (vii) LLP Name.

© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
