CHAPTER  1

PRELIMINARY

                                         LEARNING OUTCOMES

At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
 To know about the extent and commencement of the

      Companies Act, 2013.
 Identify about the application of the Act.
 Gain familiarity with the definition clause given in the Act.
1.2              CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

Preliminary chapter of the Act covers

   Short title,   Application              Definitions
   extent and
commencement

    1. INTRODUCTION

The Companies Act, 2013 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to
companies. The legislation was necessitated to meet changes in the national and
international economic environment and for expansion and growth of economy of
our country.

The Companies Act, 2013 received the assent of the Hon'ble President of India on
29th August 2013 and was notified in the Official Gazette on 30th August 2013 for
public information stating that different dates may be appointed for enforcement
of different provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, through notifications.

Section 1 came into force on 30th August 2013; 98 sections came into force on 12th
September 2013; 143 sections were enforced from 1st April 2014 and so on.

The Companies Act, 2013 is rule based legislation with 470 sections and seven
schedules. The entire Act has been divided into 29 chapters. Each chapter has at
least one set of Rules. The Companies Act, 2013 aims to improve corporate
governance, simplify regulations and strengthen the interests of investors. Thus,
this enactment makes our corporate regulations more contemporary.
PRELIMINARY  1.3

    2. SHORT TITLE, EXTENT, COMMENCEMENT
          AND APPLICATION

Section 1 of the Companies Act, 2013 deals with the title of the Act according to
which this Act may be called as the Companies Act, 2013.

Further, section deals with the extent to the applicability of the Act. It says that the
Act shall extend to the whole of India.

This section also specifies the date of commencement of this Act. Accordingly, this
section shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act shall
come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of
this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.

This Section furthermore states of the applicability of the Act. The provisions of this
Act shall apply to-

(a) companies incorporated under this Act or under any previous company law;

Example 1: ABC Ltd. was incorporated on 1.1.1972 under the Companies Act, 1956.
So, the Companies Act, 2013 shall also be applicable on ABC Ltd.

(b) insurance companies, except in so far as the said provisions are inconsistent
       with the provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 or the Insurance Regulatory
       and Development Authority Act, 1999;

(c) banking companies, except in so far as the said provisions are inconsistent
       with the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;

(d) companies engaged in the generation or supply of electricity, except in so far
       as the said provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of the Electricity
       Act, 2003;

(e) any other company governed by any special Act for the time being in force,
       except in so far as the said provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of
       such special Act, and

(f) such body corporate, incorporated by any Act for the time being in force, as
       the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, subject to
1.4        CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       such exceptions, modifications or adaptation, as may be specified in the
       notification.

Example 2: Food Corporation of India (FCI), National Highway Authority of India
(NHAI) etc.

Note: The term "except in so far as" shall mean excluding to the extent of i.e. if any
provision of the Companies Act is inconsistent with any of the provisions of other
Act (Insurance Act, Banking Regulation Act, Electricity Act, etc.) to which the
company is regulated than that company shall comply with the provisions of
respective Act/Acts to which it is governed and regulated by.

TitleCompaniesWhole of IndiaSection        1                                          1. Companies
                         ExtentAct, 2013
                                                  Commencementcame into               2. Insurance
                                                                           Applicationcompanies
                           force at once
                                                                                      3. Banking
                           and        the                                             companies

                           remaining                                                  4. Companies
                                                                                      producing /
                           provisions on                                              supplying
                                                                                      electricity
                           different dates
                                                                                      5. Company
                           through                                                    regulated by
                                                                                      special Act
                           Notifications.
                                                                                      6. Entities as
                                                                                      notified by
                                                                                      Central
                                                                                      Government

    3. DEFINITIONS

Section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 is a definition section. It provides various
terminologies used in the Act. Definitional Sections or Clauses, are known as
`internal aids to construction' and can be of immense help in interpreting or
construing the enactment or any of its parts.
PRELIMINARY  1.5

Also, according to clause 95 of section 2, words and expressions used and not
defined in this Act but defined in the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 or
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 or the Depositories Act, 1996
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.

When a word or phrase is defined as having a particular meaning in the enactment,
it is that meaning alone which must be given to it while interpreting a Section of
the Act unless there be anything repugnant in the context.

Section 21 states that- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, --

(1) Abridged prospectus means a memorandum containing
       such salient features of a prospectus as may be specified
       by the Securities and Exchange Board by making
       regulations in this behalf;

(2) Accounting standards means the standards of accounting or any addendum
       thereto for companies or class of companies referred to in section 133;

       Section 133 of the Act deals with the Central Government to Prescribe
       Accounting Standards. As per the section, the Central Government may
       prescribe the standards of accounting or any addendum thereto, as
       recommended by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, constituted
       under section 3 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, in consultation with
       and after examination of the recommendations made by the National
       Financial Reporting Authority.

       Section 133 is to be read with Rule 7 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014.
       Accordingly,

       (i) The standards of accounting as specified under the Companies Act,
               1956 shall be deemed to be the accounting standards until accounting
               standards are specified by the Central Government under section 133.

       (ii) Till the National Financial Reporting Authority* is constituted under
               section 132 of the Act, the Central Government may prescribe the
               standards of accounting or any addendum thereto, as recommended
               by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India in consultation with
               and after examination of the recommendations made by the National

1 The number given in brackets i.e. ( ) at the start of definition, denotes the clauses to section 2.
1.6  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               Advisory Committee on Accounting Standards constituted under
               section 210A of the Companies Act, 1956.

       Further, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 133, the Central
       Government in consultation with the National Advisory Committee on
       Accounting Standards prescribed that Companies (Accounting Standards)
       Rules, 2006 and the Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015 may
       be followed.

       *The Central Government hereby appoints the 1st October 2018 as the date
       of constitution of National Financial Reporting Authority.

(3) Alter or Alteration includes the making of additions, omissions and
       substitutions;

(5) Articles means-

        the articles of association of a company as originally framed, or

        as altered from time to time, or

        applied in pursuance of any previous company law, or

        applied in pursuance of this Act;

(6) Associate company, in relation to another company, means a company in
       which that other company has a significant influence, but which is not a
       subsidiary company of the company having such influence and includes a
       joint venture company.

       Explanation. -- For the purpose of this clause, --

       (a) the expression "significant influence" means control of at least twenty
               per cent. of total voting power, or control of or participation in business
               decisions under an agreement;

       (b) the expression "joint venture" means a joint arrangement whereby the
               parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the net
               assets of the arrangement;

Vide Circular dated 25/06/2014 it has been clarified that the shares held by a
company in another company in a fiduciary capacity (a fiduciary is a person who
holds a legal or ethical relationship of trust with one of more parties (persons or
group of persons. Typically, a fiduciary prudently takes care of money or other
                                       PRELIMINARY  1.7

assets for another person) shall not be counted for the purpose of determining the
relationship of associate company.

Note: Students may please note that the definition of Associate company as
defined under AS 23/ Ind AS 28 (Accounting for Investments in Associates in
Consolidated Financial Statements/ Investment in Associates and Joint Ventures) is
slightly different from the above definition as given in the Companies Act, 2013.

(7) Auditing standards means the standards of auditing or any addendum
       thereto for companies or class of companies referred to in sub-section (10)
       of section 143.

        Section 143 of the Companies Act, 2013 deals with the Powers and
       Duties of Auditors and Auditing Standards. Sub-section (10) to section 143
       provides that the Central Government may prescribe the standards of
       auditing or any addendum thereto, as recommended by the Institute of
       Chartered Accountants of India, constituted under section 3 of the Chartered
       Accountants Act, 1949, in consultation with and after examination of the
       recommendations made by the National Financial Reporting Authority:

       Provided that until any auditing standards are notified, any standard or
       standards of auditing specified by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
       India shall be deemed to be the auditing standards.

(8) Authorised capital or Nominal capital means such capital as is
       authorised by the memorandum of a company to be the maximum amount
       of share capital of the company;

(10) Board of Directors or Board, in relation to a company, means the
       collective body of the directors of the company;

(11) Body corporate or Corporation includes a company incorporated outside
       India, but does not include--

       (i) a co-operative society registered under any law relating to co-operative
               societies; and

 Just for information of the students
1.8                    CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ii) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined in this Act),
               which the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
               behalf;

(12) Book and Paper and Book or Paper include books of account, deeds,
       vouchers, writings, documents, minutes and registers maintained on paper or
       in electronic form;

(13) "Books of account" includes records maintained in
       respect of:

       (i) all sums of money received and expended by a
               company and matters in relation to which the receipts
               and expenditure take place;

       (ii) all sales and purchases of goods and services by the company;

       (iii) the assets and liabilities of the company; and

       (iv) the items of cost as may be prescribed under section 1482 in the case
               of a company which belongs to any class of companies specified under
               that section;

                       Books of Account

       In case of                        Other Companies
companies specified

 under section 148

    Items cost         (i) receipts and  (ii) Sales and   (iii) Assets and
specified u/s 148       expenditure        Purchase          Liabilities

 and (i), (ii), (iii)

2 Section 148 of the Companies Act, 2013 authorises Central Government to Specify Audit
of Items of Cost in Respect of Certain Companies.
PRELIMINARY  1.9

(14) Branch office, in relation to a company, means any establishment described
       as such by the company;

(15) Called-up capital means such part of the capital, which has been called for
       payment;

(16) Charge means an interest or lien created on the property or assets of a
       company or any of its undertakings or both as security and includes a
       mortgage;

(17) Chartered Accountant means a chartered accountant as defined in clause
       (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 who
       holds a valid certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that
       Act;

(18) Chief Executive Officer (CEO) means an officer of a company, who has
       been designated as such by it;

(19) Chief Financial Officer (CFO) means a person appointed as the Chief
       Financial Officer of a company;

       These definitions of CEO & CFO should be read with section 2(51) and 203
       which deals with the definition and appointment of Key Managerial Personnel
       (KMP) of the Companies Act, 2013.

(20) Company means a company incorporated under this Act or under any
       previous company law;

       Example 3: Reliance Industries Limited incorporated in year 1973, Tata Steel
        Limited incorporated in year 1907, Infosys Limited incorporated in year 1981.
        Such companies are incorporated under Companies Act, 1956 (previous
        company law) are also included in the above definition for being treated as
        a Company.

(21) Company limited by guarantee means a company having the liability of
       its members limited by the memorandum to such amount as the members
       may respectively undertake to contribute to the assets of the company in the
       event of its being wound up;

(22) Company limited by shares means a company having the liability of its
       members limited by the memorandum to the amount, if any, unpaid on the
       shares respectively held by them;
1.10  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Example 4: A shareholder who has paid rupees 75 on a share of face value
        rupees 100 can be called upon to pay the balance of rupees 25 only.

(26) Contributory means a person liable to contribute towards the assets of the
       company in the event of its being wound up

       Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, it is hereby clarified that a person
       holding fully paid-up shares in a company shall be considered as a
       contributory.

(27) Control shall include the right to appoint majority of the directors or to
       control the management or policy decisions exercisable by a person or
       persons acting individually or in concert, directly or indirectly, including by
       virtue of their shareholding or management rights or shareholders
       agreements or voting agreements or in any other manner;

       It is an inclusive definition and relevant for the provisions relating to
       subsidiary and holding companies.

(30) Debenture includes debenture stock, bonds or any other instrument of a
       company evidencing a debt, whether constituting a charge on the assets of
       the company or not;

       Provided that--

       (a) the instruments referred to in Chapter III-D of the Reserve Bank of India
               Act, 1934; and

       (b) such other instrument, as may be prescribed by the Central Government
               in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, issued by a company,

       shall not be treated as debenture;

(34) Director means a director appointed to the Board of a company;

(35) Dividend includes any interim dividend;

(36) Document includes summons, notice, requisition, order, declaration, form
       and register, whether issued, sent or kept in pursuance of this Act or under
       any other law for the time being in force or otherwise, maintained on paper
       or in electronic form;

(37) Employees' stock option means the option given to the directors, officers
       or employees of a company or of its holding company or subsidiary company
PRELIMINARY  1.11

       or companies, if any, which gives such directors, officers or employees, the
       benefit or right to purchase, or to subscribe for, the shares of the company
       at a future date at a pre-determined price;

(38) Expert includes an engineer, a valuer, a Chartered Accountant, a Company
       Secretary, a Cost Accountant and any other person who has the power or
       authority to issue a certificate in pursuance of any law for the time being in
       force;

(40) Financial statement in relation to a company, includes--

       (i) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;

       (ii) a profit and loss account, or in the case of a company carrying on any
               activity not for profit, an income and expenditure account for the
               financial year;

       (iii) cash flow statement for the financial year;

       (iv) a statement of changes in equity, if applicable; and

       (v) any explanatory note annexed to, or forming part of, any document
               referred to in sub-clause (i) to sub-clause (iv):

       Provided that the financial statement, with respect to One Person Company,
       small company and dormant company, may not include the cash flow
       statement;

                                                    Exemptions

          For private companies, the proviso to section 2(40) shall be read as follows:

         "Provided that the financial statement, with respect to one person company,
         small company, dormant company and private company (if such private
         company is a start-up) may not include the cash flow statement;

         Explanation. - For the purposes of this Act, the term "start-up" or "start-up
         company" means a private company incorporated under the Companies Act,
         2013 or the Companies Act, 1956 and recognised as start-up in accordance
         with the notification issued by the Department of Industrial Policy and
         Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry."

         The exceptions, modifications and adaptations shall be applicable to a
         private company which has not committed a default in filing its financial
1.12  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

statements under section 137 of the said Act or annual return under section
92 of the said Act with the Registrar.

       Note: Students may note that `Profit and Loss Account' may also be referred
       as `Statement of Profit and Loss' under the Act at some places.

(41) Financial year, in relation to any company or body corporate, means the
       period ending on the 31st day of March every year, and where it has been
       incorporated on or after the 1st day of January of a year, the period ending
       on the 31st day of March of the following year, in respect whereof financial
       statement of the company or body corporate is made up:3

       Provided that where a company or body corporate, which is a holding
       company or a subsidiary or associate company of a company incorporated
       outside India and is required to follow a different financial year for
       consolidation of its accounts outside India, the Central Government may, on
       an application made by that company or body corporate in such form and
       manner as may be prescribed, allow any period as its financial year, whether
       or not that period is a year.4

       Note: The term "company incorporated outside India" refers to Foreign
       Company incorporated under any applicable laws for the constitution of
       company outside India.

(43) Free reserves means such reserves which, as per the latest audited balance
       sheet of a company, are available for distribution as dividend:

3 With respect to specified IFSC public company & specified IFSC Private company, a proviso
has been inserted vide notification dated 5th January, 2017 stating that above stated company
which is subsidiary of a foreign company, the financial year of the subsidiary may be same as
the financial year of its holding company & approval of Tribunal shall not be required.
4 Provided also that any application pending before the Tribunal as on the date of
commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2019, shall be disposed of by
the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable to it before such commencement.
Provided also that a company or body corporate, existing on the commencement of this
Act, shall, within a period of two years from such commencement, align its financial year as
per the provisions of this clause. (this provision is not relevant now, however, it is still
forming part of the Act)
PRELIMINARY  1.13

       Provided that--

       (i) any amount representing unrealised gains, notional gains or revaluation
               of assets, whether shown as a reserve or otherwise, or

       (ii) any change in carrying amount of an asset or of a liability recognized in
               equity, including surplus in profit and loss account on measurement of
               the asset or the liability at fair value,

       shall not be treated as free reserves;

(44) Global Depository Receipt means any instrument in the form of a
       depository receipt, by whatever name called, created by a foreign depository
       outside India and authorised by a company making an issue of such
       depository receipts.

(45) Government company means any company in which not less than 51% of
       the paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government, or by any State
       Government or Governments, or partly by the Central Government and partly
       by one or more State Governments, and includes a company which is a
       subsidiary company of such a Government company;

        5Explanation. - For the purposes of this clause, the "paid-up share capital"
       shall be construed as "total voting power", where shares with differential
       voting rights have been issued.

       Example 5: X Industries Ltd. is a company in which 25% of shareholding is
       held by Central Government; 10% shareholding is held by Government of
       Maharashtra and 15% shareholding is held by Central Government and
       Government of Rajasthan. Here, X Industries Ltd. is not a government
       company as there is no compliance of minimum holding of paid-up share
       capital i.e. at least 51 % by the Central Government, or by any State
       Government or Governments or partly by the Central Government and partly
       by one or more State Government.

(46) Holding company in relation to one or more other companies, means a
       company of which such companies are subsidiary companies

5 Inserted by Exemptions to Government Companies under section 462 of the CA 2013,
notification dated 02.03.2020 (Effective From 03rd March 2020).
     1.14  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Explanation. -- For the purposes of this clause, the expression "company"
       includes any body corporate.
       For meaning of "subsidiary company" refer the definition given in section
       2(87) of the Companies Act, 2013.
(50) Issued capital means such capital as the company issues from time to time
       for subscription;
(51) Key Managerial Personnel, in relation to a company, means--

       (i) the Chief Executive Officer or the managing director or the manager;
       (ii) the company secretary;
       (iii) the whole-time director;
       (iv) the Chief Financial Officer;
       (v) such other officer, not more than one level below the directors who is

               in whole-time employment, designated as key managerial personnel by
               the Board; and
       (vi) such other officer as may be prescribed;
        Note: However, till now no other officer has been prescribed.

                       CEO/ MD/ Manager

     CS

KMP  WTD

     Such other officer- not one below directors+ in whole time
     employment+ designated as KMP

                       Other prescribed officer

(52) Listed company means a company which has any of its securities listed on
       any recognised stock exchange;
PRELIMINARY  1.15

       Provided that such class of companies, which have listed or intend to list such
       class of securities, as may be prescribed in consultation with the Securities
       and Exchange Board, shall not be considered as listed companies.

       According to rule 2A of the Companies (Specification of definitions details)
       Rules, 2014, the following classes of companies shall not be considered as
       listed companies, namely:-

       (a) Public companies which have not listed their equity shares on a
               recognized stock exchange but have listed their ­

               (i) non-convertible debt securities issued on private placement basis
                       in terms of SEBI (Issue and Listing of Debt Securities) Regulations,
                       2008; or

               (ii) non-convertible redeemable preference shares issued on private
                       placement basis in terms of SEBI (Issue and Listing of Non-
                       Convertible Redeemable Preference Shares) Regulations, 2013; or

               (iii) both categories of (i) and (ii) above.

       (b) Private companies which have listed their non-convertible debt
               securities on private placement basis on a recognized stock exchange
               in terms of SEBI (Issue and Listing of Debt Securities) Regulations, 2008;

       (c) Public companies which have not listed their equity shares on a
               recognized stock exchange but whose equity shares are listed on a
               stock exchange in a jurisdiction as specified in sub-section (3) of section
               23 of the Act.

(53) Manager means an individual who, subject to the superintendence, control
       and direction of the Board of Directors, has the management of the whole, or
       substantially the whole, of the affairs of a company, and includes a director
       or any other person occupying the position of a manager, by whatever name
       called, whether under a contract of service or not;

(54) Managing Director means a director who, by virtue of the articles of a
       company or an agreement with the company or a resolution passed in its
       general meeting, or by its Board of Directors, is entrusted with substantial
       powers of management of the affairs of the company and includes a director
       occupying the position of managing director, by whatever name called.
1.16  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Explanation.-- For the purposes of this clause, the power to do administrative
       acts of a routine nature when so authorised by the Board such as:

       · the power to affix the common seal of the company to any document
               or

       · to draw and endorse any cheque on the account of the company in any
               bank or

       · to draw and endorse any negotiable instrument or

       · to sign any certificate of share or to direct registration of transfer of any
               share,

       shall not be deemed to be included within the substantial powers of
       management;

       Explanation.- For any individual to be called as managing director, an
       individual shall first be a director duly appointed by the Company under the
       provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. This also implies that an individual
       who is not a director in the company cannot be appointed as Managing
       Director of that company.

(55) Member, in relation to a company, means--

       (i) the subscriber to the memorandum of the company who shall be
               deemed to have agreed to become member of the company, and on its
               registration, shall be entered as member in its register of members;

       (ii) every other person who agrees in writing to become a member of
               the company and whose name is entered in the register of members of
               the company;

       (iii) every person holding shares of the company and whose name is
               entered as a beneficial owner in the records of a depository;

(56) Memorandum means the memorandum of association of a company as
       originally framed or as altered from time to time in pursuance of any previous
       company law or of this Act;

(57) Net worth means the aggregate value of the paid-up share capital and all
       reserves created out of the profits, securities premium account and debit or
       credit balance of profit and loss account, after deducting the aggregate
PRELIMINARY  1.17

       value of the accumulated losses, deferred expenditure and miscellaneous
       expenditure not written off, as per the audited balance sheet, but does not
       include reserves created out of revaluation of assets, write-back of
       depreciation and amalgamation;

Example 6: The statutory auditors of a company were required to issue a certificate
on the net worth of the company as per the requirement of the management as on
30th September 2024 computed as per the provision of section 2(57) of the
Companies Act, 2013.

The company had fair valued its property, plant and equipment in the current year
which was mistakenly taken into retained earnings of the company in its books of
accounts. Advise whether this fair valuation would be covered in the net worth of
the company as per the legal requirements.

Answer: As per sec 2(57) of the Companies Act 2013, any reserves created out of
revaluation of assets doesn't form part of net worth. The company fair valued its
property, plant and equipment and took that to retained earnings.

Even if the company has taken the fair valuation to the retained earnings in its
books of accounts, the resultant credit in reserves (by whatever name called) would
be in the category of `reserves created out of revaluation of assets' which is
specifically excluded in the definition of `net worth' in section 2 (57) and hence
should be excluded by the company.

Further the auditors should also consider the matter related to accounting of this
reserve separately at the time of audit of books of accounts of the company.

(58) Notification means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
       expression "notify" shall be construed accordingly;

(59) Officer includes any director, manager or key managerial personnel or any
       person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the Board of
       Directors or any one or more of the directors is or are accustomed to act;

(60) Officer who is in default, for the purpose of any provision in this Act which
       enacts that an officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to any
       penalty or punishment by way of imprisonment, fine or otherwise, means any
       of the following officers of a company, namely:--

       (i) whole-time director (WTD);
1.18  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (ii) key managerial personnel (KMP);

       (iii) where there is no key managerial personnel, such director or directors
               as specified by the Board in this behalf and who has or have given his
               or their consent in writing to the Board to such specification, or all the
               directors, if no director is so specified;

       (iv) any person who, under the immediate authority of the Board or any key
               managerial personnel, is charged with any responsibility including
               maintenance, filing or distribution of accounts or records, authorises,
               actively participates in, knowingly permits, or knowingly fails to take
               active steps to prevent, any default;

       (v) any person in accordance with whose advice, directions or instructions
               the Board of Directors of the company is accustomed to act, other than
               a person who gives advice to the Board in a professional capacity;

       (vi) every director, in respect of a contravention of any of the provisions of
               this Act, who is aware of such contravention by virtue of the receipt by
               him of any proceedings of the Board or participation in such
               proceedings without objecting to the same, or where such
               contravention had taken place with his consent or connivance;

       (vii) in respect of the issue or transfer of any shares of a company, the share
               transfer agents, registrars and merchant bankers to the issue or transfer;

       Example 7: In a company, a default was committed with respect to the
       allotment of shares by the officers. In company there were no managing
       director, whole time director, a manager, secretary, a person charged by the
       Board with the responsibility of complying with the provisions of the Act, and
       neither any director/directors specified by the board. Therefore, in such
       situation, all the directors of the company may be treated as officers in
       default.

(62) One Person Company means a company which has only one person as a
       member;

(63) Ordinary or special resolution means an ordinary resolution, or as the
       case may be, special resolution referred to in section 114 (Ordinary and
       Special Resolution);
PRELIMINARY  1.19

(64) Paid-up share capital or share capital paid-up means such aggregate
       amount of money credited as paid-up as is equivalent to the amount received
       as paid-up in respect of shares issued and also includes any amount credited
       as paid-up in respect of shares of the company, but does not include any
       other amount received in respect of such shares, by whatever name called;

(65) Postal ballot means voting by post or through any electronic mode;

       This definition is related to section 110 to be read with Rule 22 of the
       Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014 specifying the
       procedure to be followed for conducting of business through postal ballot
       and provides the list of items of business which should be transacted only by
       means of voting through a postal ballot.

(66) Prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(68) Private company means a company having a minimum paid-up share
       capital as may be prescribed7, and which by its articles,:

       (i) restricts the right to transfer its shares;

       (ii) except in case of One Person Company, limits the number of its
               members to two hundred:

               Provided that where two or more persons hold one or more shares in a
               company jointly, they shall, for the purposes of this clause, be treated
               as a single member:

               Provided further that--

               (A) persons who are in the employment of the company; and

               (B) persons who, having been formerly in the employment of the
                       company, were members of the company while in that
                       employment and have continued to be members after the
                       employment ceased,

               shall not be included in the number of members; and

7 Since nothing has been prescribed so far, thus, there is no minimum paid up share capital to
form a private company.
1.20  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (iii) prohibits any invitation to the public to subscribe for any securities of
               the company;

       The requirement of having a minimum paid up share capital shall not apply
       to a section 8 company (Formation of companies with charitable objects, etc.)
       vide notification dated 5th June 2015.

       The above-mentioned exemption shall be applicable to a section 8 company
       which has not committed a default in filing its financial statements under
       section 137 of the Companies Act, 2013, or annual return under section 92 of
       the said Act with Registrar. [Vide amendment notification G.S.R. 584(E) dated
       13th June 2017.]

(69) Promoter means a person--

       (a) who has been named as such in a prospectus or is identified by the
               company in the annual return referred to in section 92, or

       (b) who has control over the affairs of the company, directly or indirectly
               whether as a shareholder, director or otherwise; or

       (c) in accordance with whose advice, directions or instructions the Board
               of Directors of the company is accustomed to act:

               Provided that nothing in sub-clause (c) shall apply to a person who is
               acting merely in a professional capacity;

(70) Prospectus means any document described or issued as a prospectus and
       includes a red herring prospectus or shelf prospectus or any notice, circular,
       advertisement or other document inviting offers from the public for the
       subscription or purchase of any securities of a body corporate;

(71) Public company means a company which--

       (a) is not a private company; and
       (b) has a minimum paid-up share capital as may be prescribed8:

       Provided that a company which is a subsidiary of a company, not being a
       private company, shall be deemed to be public company for the purposes of

8 Since nothing has been prescribed so far, thus, there is no minimum paid up share capital to
form a public company.
PRELIMINARY  1.21

       this Act even where such subsidiary company continues to be a private
       company in its articles;

       Example 8: A Pvt. Ltd. is wholly owned subsidiary of AB Ltd., a public company
       incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013. A Pvt. Ltd. wanted to avail
       exemptions as provided to private companies. In this case, since A Pvt. Ltd. is
       subsidiary of AB Ltd., which is a public company, therefore A Pvt. Ltd. will be
       deemed to be a public company and will be not allowed to avail exemptions
       provided to a private company.

       The requirement of having a minimum paid up share capital shall not apply
       to a section 8 company vide notification dated 5th June 2015.

(74) Register of companies means the register of companies
       maintained by the Registrar on paper or in any electronic mode
       under this Act;

(75) Registrar means a Registrar, an Additional Registrar, a Joint Registrar, a
       Deputy Registrar or an Assistant Registrar, having the duty of registering
       companies and discharging various functions under this Act;

(76) Related party, with reference to a company, means--

       (i) a director or his relative;

       (ii) a key managerial personnel or his relative;

       (iii) a firm, in which a director, manager or his relative is a partner;

       (iv) a private company in which a director or manager or his relative is a
               member or director;

       (v) a public company in which a director or manager is a director and
               holds along with his relatives, more than two per cent of its paid-up
               share capital;

       (vi) any body corporate whose Board of Directors, managing director or
               manager is accustomed to act in accordance with the advice, directions
               or instructions of a director or manager;

       (vii) any person on whose advice, directions or instructions a director or
               manager is accustomed to act:
1.22  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

               Provided that nothing in sub-clauses (vi) and (vii) shall apply to the
               advice, directions or instructions given in a professional capacity;

        9(viii) any body corporate which is-

               (A) a holding, subsidiary or an associate company of such company;

               (B) a subsidiary of a holding company to which it is also a subsidiary;
                       or

               (C) an investing company or the venturer of the company;

               Explanation.- For the purpose of this clause, "the investing company
               or the venturer of a company" means a body corporate whose
               investment in the company would result in the company becoming an
               associate company of the body corporate.

       Exemption - This Clause (viii) shall not apply with respect to section 188
       (Related Party transactions) to a private company vide Notification No. G.S.R.
       464(E) dated 5th June, 2015.

       (ix) such other person as may be prescribed;

               As per Rule 3 given in the Companies (Specification of Definitions
               Details) Rules, 2014, for the purposes of sub-clause (ix) of clause (76) of
               section 2 of the Act, a director (other than an independent director) or
               key managerial personnel of the holding company or his relative with
               reference to a company, shall be deemed to be a related party.

               Example 9: XYZ Pvt. Ltd. has two subsidiary companies, Y Pvt. Ltd. and
               Z Pvt. Ltd. Here as per the section 2(76)(viii)(B), Y Pvt. Ltd and Z Pvt. Ltd.
               are related parties. However, as per the Notification No. G.S.R. 464(E)
               dated 5th June, 2015, clause (viii) shall not apply with respect to section
               188 to a private company. Therefore Y Pvt. Ltd and Z Pvt. Ltd are not
               related parties for the purpose of section 188. However, if Y Pvt. Ltd
               and Z Pvt. Ltd. have common directors, then they will be deemed to be
               related parties because of section 2(76)(iv).

               Example 10: Now suppose, XYZ Ltd. a public company, has two
               subsidiary companies, Y Pvt. Ltd and Z Pvt. Ltd. Here as per section

9 The above clause (viii) shall not apply with respect to section 188 to a Specified IFSC Public
company vide Notification no. G. S.R. 08(E) dated 4th January, 2017.
PRELIMINARY  1.23

               2(71), a private company which is a subsidiary of a public company will
               be deemed to be a public company, so Y Pvt. Ltd and Z Pvt. Ltd will not
               be eligible to avail exemption under the Notification No. G.S.R. 464(E)
               dated 5th June, 2015. Therefore, as per section 2(76)(viii)(B), Y Pvt. Ltd
               and Z Pvt. Ltd are related parties. In addition, XYZ Ltd. will also be
               related Party to Y Pvt. Ltd and Z Pvt. Ltd.
(77) Relative, with reference to any person, means anyone who is related to
       another, if--

       (i) they are members of a Hindu Undivided Family;

       (ii) they are husband and wife; or

       (iii) one person is related to the other in such manner as may be prescribed;

       Rule 4 given in the Companies (Specification of Definitions Details) Rules, 2014
       provides of the List of Relatives in terms of Clause (77) of section 2.
       Accordingly, a person shall be deemed to be the relative of another, if he or
       she is related to another in the following manner, namely:-

       (1) Father: Provided that the term "Father" includes step-father.

       (2) Mother: Provided that the term "Mother" includes the step-mother.

       (3) Son: Provided that the term "Son" includes the step-son.

       (4) Son's wife.

       (5) Daughter.

       (6) Daughter's husband.

       (7) Brother: Provided that the term "Brother" includes the step-brother;

       (8) Sister: Provided that the term "Sister" includes the step-sister.
(78) Remuneration means any money or its equivalent given or passed to any

       person for services rendered by him and includes perquisites as defined under
       the Income Tax Act, 1961.
(84) Share means a share in the share capital of a company and includes stock;
1.24  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

(85) Small company means a company, other than a public company,--

       (i) paid-up share capital of which does not exceed fifty lakh rupees or such
               higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not be more than ten
               crore rupees; and

       (ii) turnover of which as per profit and loss account for the immediately
               preceding financial year does not exceed two crore rupees or such
               higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not be more than one
               hundred crore rupees:

       Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to--

       (A) a holding company or a subsidiary company;

       (B) a company registered under section 8; or

       (C) a company or body corporate governed by any special Act.

       As per the Companies (Specification of Definitions Details) Rules, 2014, for
       the purposes of sub-clause (i) and sub-clause (ii) of clause (85) of section 2
       of the Act, paid up capital and turnover of the small company shall not exceed
       rupees four crore and rupees forty crore respectively.

      Capital- ` 4 crore

                        Turnover- ` 40 crore

Example 11: H Ltd. is the holding company of S Pvt. Ltd. As per the last profit
and loss account for the year ending 31st March, 2024 of S Pvt. Ltd., its
turnover was to the extent of ` 1.50 crore; and paid up share capital was
` 40 lakh. Since S Pvt. Ltd., as per the turnover and paid up share capital
norms, qualifies for the status of a `small company' it wants to be categorized
as `small company'. S Pvt. Ltd. cannot be categorized as a `small company'
because it is the subsidiary of another company (H Ltd.). [Proviso to section
2(85)].
PRELIMINARY  1.25

(86) Subscribed capital means such part of the capital which is for the time
       being subscribed by the members of a company;

       Example 12: ABC Ltd. was registered with Registrar with an Authorised
       capital of ` 2,00,00,000 where each share is of ` 10.

       In response to the advertisements made by the company to buy shares in the
       company, applications have been received for 10,00,000 shares but company
       actually issued 700,000 shares where company has called for ` 8 per share.

       All the calls have been met in full except three shareholders who still owe for
       their 6000 shares in total.

       Amount of various share capital

       Authorized share capital = ` 2,00,00,000 (2 crore)

       Subscribed capital = 10,00,000 x 10 = ` 1,00,00,000 (1 Crore)

       Issued capital = 7,00,000 x 10 = ` 70,00,000

       Called-up capital = 7,00,000 x 8 = ` 56,00,000

       Paid-up capital = 56,00,000 ­ (6000 x ` 8) = ` 55,52,000

(87) Subsidiary company or Subsidiary, in relation to any other company (that
       is to say the holding company), means a company in which the holding
       company--

       (i) controls the composition of the Board of Directors; or

       (ii) exercises or controls more than one-half of the total voting power
               either at its own or together with one or more of its subsidiary
               companies:

       Provided that such class or classes of holding companies as may be
       prescribed shall not have layers of subsidiaries beyond such numbers as may
       be prescribed.

       Explanation--For the purposes of this clause,--

       (a) a company shall be deemed to be a subsidiary company of the holding
               company even if the control referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause
               (ii) is of another subsidiary company of the holding company;
1.26  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       (b) the composition of a company's Board of Directors shall be deemed to
               be controlled by another company if that other company by exercise of
               some power exercisable by it at its discretion can appoint or remove all
               or a majority of the directors;

       (c) the expression "company" includes any body corporate;

       (d) "layer" in relation to a holding company means its subsidiary or
               subsidiaries;

       As per the notification dated 27th December 2013, Ministry clarified that the
       shares held by a company or power exercisable by it in another company in
       a fiduciary capacity shall not be counted for the purpose of determining the
       holding ­subsidiary relationship in terms of the provision of section 2(87) of
       the Companies Act, 2013.

(88) Sweat equity shares means such equity shares as are issued by a company
       to its directors or employees at a discount or for consideration, other than
       cash, for providing their know-how or making available rights in the nature
       of intellectual property rights or value additions, by whatever name called;

(89) Total voting power, in relation to any matter, means the
       total number of votes which may be cast in regard to that
       matter on a poll at a meeting of a company if all the members
       thereof or their proxies having a right to vote on that matter
       are present at the meeting and cast their votes;

(90) Tribunal means the National Company Law Tribunal constituted under
       section 408;

(91) Turnover means the gross amount of revenue recognised in the profit and
       loss account from the sale, supply, or distribution of goods or on account of
       services rendered, or both, by a company during a financial year;

(92) Unlimited company means a company not having any limit on the liability
       of its members;

(93) Voting right means the right of a member of a company to
       vote in any meeting of the company or by means of postal
       ballot.
PRELIMINARY  1.27

TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE

MCQ based Questions

1. Green Ltd. is incorporated on 3rd January, 2023. As per the Companies Act,
       2013, what will be the financial year for the company:

       (a) 31st March, 2023

       (b) 31st December, 2023

       (c) 31st March, 2024

       (d) 30th September, 2024

2. Roma along with her six friends has incorporated Roma Trading Ltd. in May
       2023. The paid-up share capital of the company is ` 2 crore. Further, in April
       2024, she noticed that in the last financial year, the turnover of the company
       was well below ` 40 crore. Advise whether the company can be treated as a
       `small company'.

       (a) Roma Trading Ltd. is definitely a `small company' since its paid-up capital
              is much below ` 4 crore and also its turnover has not exceeded the
              threshold limit of ` 40 crore.

       (b) The concept of `small company' is applicable only in case of a private
               limited company/OPC and therefore, despite meeting the criteria of
               `small company' it being a public limited company it cannot enjoy
               benefits of `small company'.

       (c) Unlike a private limited company/OPC which automatically becomes a
               `small company' as soon as it meets the criteria of `small company', Roma
               Trading Ltd. being a public limited company has to maintain the norms
               applicable to a `small company' continuously for two years so that,
               thereafter, it will be treated as a `small company'.

       (d) If all the shareholders of Roma Trading Ltd. give an undertaking to the
               ROC stating that they will not let the paid-up share capital and also
               turnover exceed the limits applicable to a `small company' in the next two
               years, then it can be treated as a `small company'.

3. Abhilasha and Amrita have incorporated a `not for profit' private limited
       company which is registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013. One
1.28  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       of their friends has informed them that their company can be categorized as a
       `small company' because as per the last profit and loss account for the year
       ending 31st March, 2024, its turnover was less than ` 40 crore and its paid up
       share capital was less than ` 4 crore. Advise.

       (a) A section 8 company, which meets the criteria of `turnover' and `paid-up
               share capital' in the last financial year, can avail the status of `small
               company' only if it acquires at least 5% stake in another `small company'
               within the immediately following financial year.

       (b) If the acquisition of minimum 5% stake in another `small company'
               materializes in the second financial year (and not in the immediately
               following financial year) after meeting the criteria of `turnover' and `paid-
               up share capital' then with the written permission of concerned ROC, it
               can acquire the status of `small company'.

       (c) The status of `small company' cannot be bestowed upon a `not for profit'
               company which is registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.

       (d) A section 8 company, if incorporated as a private limited company (and
               not as public limited company) can avail the status of `small company'
               with the permission of concerned ROC, after it meets the criteria of
               `turnover' and `paid-up share capital'.

4. "Associate company", in relation to another company, means a company in
       which that other company has a significant influence, but which is not
       a subsidiary company of the company having such influence and includes
       a joint venture company. Here, the words `significant influence' means:

       (a) Control of at least 10% of total voting power

       (b) Control of at least 15% of total voting power

       (c) Control of at least 20% of total voting power

       (d) Control of at least 25% of total voting power

Descriptive Questions

1. MNP Private Ltd. is a company registered under the Companies Act, 2013 with
       a paid-up share capital of ` 2 crore and turnover of ` 60 crore. Explain the
                          PRELIMINARY                  1.29

       meaning of the "Small Company" and examine the following in accordance
       with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013:

       (i) Whether the MNP Private Ltd. can avail the status of small company?
       (ii) What will be your answer if the turnover of the company is ` 30 crore?

2. Flora Fauna Limited was registered as a public company. There are 230
       members in the company as noted below:

    (a) Directors and their relatives                                 50

    (b) Employees                                                     15

    (c) Ex-Employees (Shares were allotted when they were employees)  10

    (d) 5 couples holding shares jointly in the name of husband and wife 10
              (5*2)

    (e) Others                                                        145

    The Board of Directors of the company propose to convert it into a private
    company. Also advise whether reduction in the number of members is
    necessary.

ANSWERS

Answer to MCQ based Questions

1.  (c) 31st March, 2024

2.  (b) The concept of `small company' is applicable only in case of a

         private limited company/OPC and therefore, despite meeting

         the criteria of `small company' it being a public limited

         company cannot enjoy benefits of `small company'.

3.  (c) The status of `small company' cannot be bestowed upon a `not

         for profit' company which is registered under Section 8 of the

         Companies Act, 2013.

4.  (c) Control of at least 20% of total voting power

Answer to Descriptive Questions

1. Small Company: According to Section 2(85) of the Companies Act, 2013,
1.30  CORPORATE AND OTHER LAWS

       Small Company means a company, other than a public company,--

       (1) paid-up share capital of which does not exceed fifty lakh rupees or such
               higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not be more than ten
               crore rupees; and

       (2) turnover of which as per its last profit and loss account does not exceed
               two crore rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed which
               shall not be more than one hundred crore rupees.

       Nothing in this clause shall apply to--

       (A) a holding company or a subsidiary company;

       (B) a company registered under section 8; or

       (C) a company or body corporate governed by any special Act.

       As per the Companies (Specification of Definitions Details) Rules, 2014, for
       the purposes of sub-clause (i) and sub-clause (ii) of clause (85) of section 2
       of the Act, paid up capital and turnover of the small company shall not exceed
       rupees four crore and rupees forty crore respectively.

       (i) In the present case, MNP Private Ltd., is a company registered under
               the Companies Act, 2013 with a paid up share capital of ` 2 crore and
               having turnover of ` 60 crore. Since only one criteria of share capital
               not exceeding ` 4 crore is met, but the second criteria of turnover not
               exceeding ` 40 crore is not met and the provisions require both the
               criteria to be met in order to avail the status of a small company, MNP
               Ltd. cannot avail the status of small company.

       (ii) If the turnover of the company is ` 30 crore, then both the criteria will
               be fulfilled and MNP Ltd. can avail the status of small company.

2. According to section 2(68) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Private company"
       means a company having a minimum paid-up share capital as may be
       prescribed, and which by its articles, except in case of One Person Company,
       limits the number of its members to two hundred.

       However, where two or more persons hold one or more shares in a company
       jointly, they shall, for the purposes of this clause, be treated as a single
       member.
                               PRELIMINARY       1.31

It is further provided that -

(A) persons who are in the employment of the company; and

(B) persons who, having been formerly in the employment of the company,
       were members of the company while in that employment and have
       continued to be members after the employment ceased,

shall not be included in the number of members.

In the instant case, Flora Fauna Limited may be converted* into a private
company only if the total members of the company are limited to 200. Total
Number of members

(i) Directors and their relatives                          50

(ii) 5 Couples (5x1)                                       5

(iii) Others                                               145

Total                                                  200

Therefore, there is no need for reduction in the number of members since
existing number of members are 200 which does not exceed maximum limit
of 200.

*The provisions relating to conversion of public company to private company
is covered in the Chapter 2 ­ Incorporation of Company and Matters
incidental thereto.
